TURNS ABOUT TOWN

ROBERT CORTES HOLLIDAY



     _The Players,
      16 Gramercy Park,
      New York City,
      June 10, 1921._

     DEAR JOHN:

     I am, with your permission, dedicating to you a new book of
     mine--that it, on condition that you help me read the proofs. The
     book is to be called "Turns About Town." It will be published
     sometime this autumn.

    _Ever yours,_
        BOB.

_To: John Bunker, Esqre_

       *       *       *       *       *

    _New York,
     521 West 148th Street,
     June 12, 1921._

     DEAR BOB:

     _You can't intimidate me by any such threat. On the contrary, I
     think I shall be secretly (and tremendously) pleased. As for the
     proofs, all I have to say is (in the words of the stage villain),
     "Produce your proofs!"_

    _Always, dear Bob,
     Sincerely yours,_
        JOHN.




FOREWORD


More than half of these pieces were syndicated in a number of American
newspapers by The Central Press Association of New York. Several others
of them originally appeared in _The Bookman_. "Literary Lives" has been
amplified since it was written for the New York _Times_ as a review of
the "Dictionary of National Biography," Second Supplement, Volumes II
and III. "Only She Was There" and "Former Tenant of His Room" are
reprinted from the New York _Evening Post_. "The Sexless Camera" was
contributed to a magazine called _The International_. "I Know an Editor"
was written at the invitation of a gentleman whose name I cannot recall,
and whether or not he ever used it in whatever publication it was with
which he was connected I do not know.

I thank all these friends of mine for permitting me to here reprint
these articles.

R. C. H.

New York, 1921.


TURNS ABOUT TOWN

CHAPTER I

THE HOTEL GUEST


Some people just go to a hotel (sometimes referred to as "an hotel") and
stay awhile and go away again. And think nothing about the matter.

Of course, some may complain more or less at the place about the
"service." Or swank round outside about the address, saying carelessly:
"Oh! yes: at the Blackstone, you know." Or again, if it's a rather
inexpensive place, remark to friends: "Isn't it a funny hole! But the
cuisine is excellent. You'd be surprised! That's why I stop there. And
then it's much more homey, too, than those garish places."

Now I myself am a fan for hotels.

If I was a rich man I'd do like an aristocratic and restless young man I
know, who used to go to one New York hotel about twelve at night (after
the evening's entertainment) and leave a call for ten in the morning,
when he would get up and drive to another hotel, check in, eat lunch and
dinner there, and move on to a third New York hotel that night. A
cheerful way he had of adding variety to his life.

He was a highly agreeable youth, this chap. Always "wore" a
silver-headed cane. I'm sorry to have to say that he is now in jail.
Yep! You see, he had many attractive qualities, but dependability was
not a feature of his equipment. However, his is a resilient nature, and,
fortunately, he is an epicure by temperament. I was rather distressed,
myself, when I heard that he was in jail; and other of his friends that
I met also were decidedly disturbed about him. One day one of them got a
letter from him (it was in France, you know, that he was then in jail),
a bubbling, delightful letter (just like the youth), in which he
declared with much gusto that the jail he was in had the best menu of
any jail in France.

But about hotels. Oh, yes!

I always like those huge, brown-paper laundry bags they have hanging up,
pressed beautifully flat, in the rooms, closets or bathrooms of hotels.
You can't roll up your laundry all in one wad and thrust it into one of
these bags, because this would tear the bag. The way to do is to put in,
for instance, first your collars, then, say, your sox, follow perhaps
with your shirts, and so on. In hotels of the very first water, you have
observed, a neat little pocket is attached to the outside of the bag,
into which you have the fun of pinning your laundry slip, all
elaborately made out.

Next thing, of course, is to get your laundry started on its way. And
here come up a view of the nice nuances of hotels. You gotta watch your
Ps and Qs in these matters or you're likely to get a black-eye at your
hotel. All right in a modest sort of place just to holler down the
telephone for a boy. Then you say to boy, waving hand toward objects:
"Laundry to go down, suit to be pressed, hat to be ironed, shoes to be
polished, letters to be mailed," and so forth. Boy gathers up
miscellaneous collection of articles and proceeds upon these divers
assignments. Presto! Nothing further to detain you.

But suppose you have gone in for a little more class in the matter of
your hotel--Statler, or something like that. Then you find much more of
a ritual to life. To accomplish your existence requires thought, a clear
head--and time. You pay the penalty of the dignity of pomp and
circumstance. No large, off-hand, free and easy manner about sending up
a boy. The "operator" knows nothing of boys. In the matter of your
laundry you may request her to connect you with the "bell captain,"
through whose agency (but not otherwise) a boy may be procured. One
message. In the matter of your suit you may request to be connected with
the "valet service." Message two. And so on.

Then you sit you down and await the procession. Or, if you prefer,
contemplate the spectacle of life by looking out at the window.

You fee Buttons. Lapse of time.

Boots (as Dickens calls him) arrives--what probably here is a
porter--for shoes. Then you have an excellent opportunity (which may not
occur again during the day) for a slight period of philosophical
meditation, or to whistle a tune, before the valet appears.

In such places as I am describing it is not etiquette at all (though it
may seem to you the simplest way of doing the thing) to call a bellboy
to get down your bag. The porter does that--and through the correct
channel, that is by way of the freight elevator. And, say, something
goes wrong with your ice-water pipe. You are not to outrage hotel
decency here. What is necessary for you to procure is a waiter. Waiters
attend to your inner wants.

I like best the character of valet when he is English (either so by
birth, or this by self-cultivation); wears a skirt coat, immaculately
pressed, and a "buttonhole"; advances into the room in the attitude of a
bow, and comes to a pause in the pose of one listening with deep and
profoundly respectful attention to the haughty utterance of a stage
earl. Though, indeed, there is an element of disquiet in your being thus
elevated to the Peerage if, as with me, the suit you turn over to this
unexceptionable servitor is of Hirt, Snuffler and Muss manufacture, and
growing a trifle frail in the seat.

The same thing is true of bath-rooms. I don't, of course, mean that
bath-rooms perform the valet act. But that the more aristocratic in
hotels you get the more likely you are, so to say, to get into hot water
in bath-rooms. Like this:

If you get into a bathtub which is not quite the last word in bathtubs,
that is a bathtub which has legs and spigots to turn on the water, you
know where you are at all the while. You turn on the hot water in the
amount desired. It comes out of the hot water spout. As desired you turn
on the cold water. Out of the cold water spout comes it.

But, as you know, the last word in bathtubs is not simple and democratic
like that. It is built onto the floor and has a clock-like dial on the
wall. Dial marked at different points: "Cold," "Medium," "Hot," "Off."
Turn little handle to regulate temperature and flow of water. All out of
same pipe. Yes--but--dial untruthful--very. "Off" scalds you; "Medium"
freezes you. Bad time trying to take last word in baths.

"Tub or shower?" Maybe you say "shower." And draw one of those
police-court cells. Except the door, no opening in the little, square,
completely cement room but the small hole in the center of the floor
through which the water runs away. But that's not the way to look at it.
These little catacomb-like chambers are Ã¦sthetic in their ascetic
character. You may entertain yourself by fancying that you are St.
Jerome, or somebody like that. In here nothing that it will hurt can
get wet, and you can have a fine time making the whole room a
merry-go-round of splashes. One disturbing thought may occur to you. If
the door should stick you might not be found until the hotel got worried
about your bill, when perhaps it would be too late.

Still, I think the chummiest bath-rooms are those with a bay-window;
very reprehensible those which have no hooks on which to hang your
pajamas and razor strop.

Then there are those hotels so far-seeing into the possibilities of evil
chance and so solicitous of your equanimity that they provide your pin
cushion with one suspender button. I suppose the thought is to impress
you with the idea that nothing for your comfort, even down to the
smallest detail, is forgotten. Still, though I do not know that such an
untoward incident ever happened, it is within the range of human
possibility that a man might be shorn of two suspender buttons at once.
If, further, the hotel management were co-ordinated with the gentlemen's
underwear business a safety pin would be served along with the suspender
button--in view of the singular fact that, until your wife has taken a
reef in them, all nether garments are much too great in girth for any
figure at all approximating normal.

Working, however, as it does, with human material no hotel can get away
with perfection. For, as Dr. Johnson observed, "a fallible being will
fail somewhere." It was in San Francisco recently that three days were
required for me to recover a suit sent in the morning to be pressed by
that afternoon. This mischance was occasioned by three circumstances. To
wit: goblins (presumably) made away with the ticket attached to it; the
hotel tailor fell indisposed with (I hope) leprosy; and his assistant
had a slight mental infirmity, in other words he was seven times an
idiot.

Reverse English in Los Angeles a few days later. When one night I found
neatly hung on the coat frame in my closet a suit of excellent material,
of fashionable design, and seemingly of virgin character. I reported the
matter to the third assistant manager. One criticism only I have to make
of that suit. It was too confoundedly tight.

Then, of course, even at the best places (I almost think particularly in
the best places) you are likely any time to find under your door in the
morning a telephone message stamped "Rush," directing you to call
so-and-so "as soon as possible"--and dated 5:17-1/2 two days earlier.
Or, on coming in you are handed by the clerk a memorandum which states
that Mr. Cohan telephoned. Such matters, you reflect, are retrogressive.
If you are unacquainted with any gentleman of the name of Mr. Cohan, so
it may very well be that the guest here who is a friend of Mr. Cohan
received notice that _your_ friend Mr. Sloan telephoned. And there you
are!

My friend Harry Heartydrop (who, I declare! looks rosier even than
before the middle of January, 1920) has adopted a hotel life altogether
of late. He explains to me that the advantage of this is the new
side-line activity of numerous compassionate bell captains, who, it
seems--but that would be telling.

One of the pleasantest things, I think, about hotels is the "night maid
service" furnished at fashionable places. When you come in you find your
light burning and so do not break your shins, and your bed is "turned
down" for you. Very softening to the spirit, this. In a kind of a sort
of a hazy way one's thoughts turn back to the maternal solicitude which
used to "tuck" one "in."

Good night!




CHAPTER II

A HUMORIST MISFITS AT A MURDER TRIAL


Are you in on the great Crime Wave, brother? Almost everybody is, I
guess, in one way or another. What's your particular line? Murderer,
bandit, burglar, mortally wounded innocent bystander, juror, witness, or
victim? The police are in on it, too; every once in awhile one of them
gets blackjacked, or something like that.

I had the flu bad enough, when that was the big thing going; but somehow
so far I myself have escaped being caught in the Crime Wave. This gives
me the great advantage over most people of being a detached spectator of
the rollicking game.

I have a friend, though, who was caught up just a few days ago. He has
been telling me all about it. Murder case.

This fellow is a sort of author. He had served a time or two as a juror
in the Supreme Court of New York County. In that building down by the
City Hall. But he says those cases bored him terribly. They were
chicken-feed sort of rows, generally concerned with the question of how
many dollars and fractions thereof X had occasioned the loss of to Z by
reason of his failure to deliver such and such a quantity of (say)
beeswax before the drop in the market of 39.7-1/4 cents, as called for
by telephone agreement, possibly. The "Court" (a nice, pink and grey old
fellow) would go to sleep, with his mouth open, during the drone of the
legal argument, and be awakened automatically (apparently by some change
in atmospheric conditions) at the moment required for him to begin his
charge to the jury. Occasionally, he would come semi-to for an instant
before this, and indistinctly utter the words, "Objection sustained."

My friend's chief impression of these proceedings is his recollection of
one phenomenon which he observed. Not long after the opening of the
presentation of X's side of the case he saw very clearly that Z hadn't a
leg to stand on. It was ridiculous that he had the face to come into
court with an attempt to question the truth of facts which were as
apparent to the naked eye as the Woolworth Building. My friend felt it
needless to pay any further attention to the foolish formalities of the
argument. If he had not had an uneasy feeling that he might get pinched
for this, he would have gone to sleep, like the Judge.

But those were dull days in the jury business.

A little later my friend gets some sort of a ticket instructing him to
call and talk things over with a gentleman having the university degree
of Commissioner of Jurors. This gentleman asks my friend if he has ever
been arrested on a criminal charge, if he is opposed to capital
punishment, and if he has any prejudice against Episcopalians. My friend
is a man of liberal mind, and replies that he would just as soon hang an
Episcopalian as anybody else. "You're on," said the gentleman, reaching
for a blotter; and signed him up. My friend didn't know exactly for
what. But the gentleman said everything was all right, they might not
call on my friend for a long time, and then perhaps it would be a short
case.

Sometime back was all this. My friend had almost forgotten about his
acquaintance with the Commissioner. Then all of a sudden the gong sounds
and the great Crime Wave is on. Detectives dash madly about with
shotguns. A jeweller is shot every day after lunch and a subway
ticket-seller is robbed directly after every train starts. My friend
hurries home early because everybody is fined who is caught on any paved
street after dark, and there in his letter-box is the summons from his
old friend the Commissioner, who apparently has borne him in mind all
this while.

On the document is printed by a printing-press, "Jack Hammond _vs._ The
People of the State of New York." And on it is written with a pen my
friend's name, before the printed words "Special Juror." It very
urgently invites my friend to appear at ten o'clock four days distant at
the Criminal Courts Building and there "await further order of the
Court."

You get off the subway at Brooklyn Bridge, you know, and go, past the
Municipal Building, up Centre Street. A district around behind the
"lanes" (as they say of steamship travel) of general traffic, and one
infrequently traversed by my friend. He was much interested in the
spectacle hereabout. Buildings labelled Public Health on this hand,
buildings labelled Public Records on that. Then you come to that prison
as gruesome in its name as the Tower of London is romantic in its
connotation--the Tombs. The structure itself, a cluster of rather
slender wings, rises from behind its dark walls with an element of
grace, in contrast to that chill, squat, mouldering pile which begot and
bequeathed the historic name. Ugh! though, those barred windows, row
upon row, give a fellow such qualms as do the ugly symbols of our
mortality. Even though you ain't done nothin', make you feel sorta faint
like inside!

There in the south wall is a little door, like a rabbit burrow, with a
little group about it, and quite a small bustle going on. Standing in
this bit of a doorway, as though she had something to do in the way of
belonging there, is a queer, oval body who looks much as though she
might be what is called an "apple woman." Marked "Visitors' Entrance,"
this door. What is it all the people on this side of the street are
pausing to look at over there?

A cab is drawn up. From this lightly steps (or flashes) a dizzy dream.
"Floppy" hat, scant skirt awhirl, pink-hued stockings gleaming to the
height of the full curve behind the knee, tall satin pump-heels dancing
the wearer on her toes--she swirls through the dark doorway. "They all
have their wimmin," remarks a blousy-looking loiterer to my friend.

At the north, three stories up, the prison connects with the courts
building by that fabled structure the "bridge of sighs."

Lively scene before the main entrance to this edifice on Centre Street.
Streams of figures hurrying up the broad front steps--on their way to a
busy day at the height of the crime season. Taxis flying up and
discharging chattering groups as at a theatre. Open pops a taxi door,
out leap three. A couple of very hard-looking young men, of that
sawed-off, stocky stature frequently observed in this type of very
hard-looking young man. Elegantly dressed, these; between them one of
"Oh!-you-beautiful-doll" type. Rapidly they make their way up the steps,
as though very well acquainted with the place.

Regular jam inside. My friend learned from an attendant that his
particular destination was two flights up. Great crush wedging into the
elevator. Elevator man calls out merrily to an acquaintance he observes
outside his door: "It's a great life if you don't weaken!"

Threads his way, my friend, around the balcony, so to say, upstairs.
Centre of building open from ground floor to roof. Effect: spacious,
beautiful, ornamented in the richness of a house of grand opera. Finds
the right door. Card on the wall nearby. Several persons (tough-looking
youths in caps and soft collars) reading it. It lists previous day's
proceedings in this court room. Says: So-and-so; Murder; Indicted (or
something like that). Then the names of attorneys for the defense given.
Second line: So-and-so; Murder; etc. Third line: So-and-so; Murder.
Fourth line: So-and-so; Grand Larceny. Next line: So-an-so; Rape. Next:
Murder. And so on. Sure, my friend thinks, I've got to the real shop
this time. He has a few moments yet, and so he strolls over to a door at
the opposite side of the building. 'Nother card there. Same sort of
thing: murder, murder, grand larceny, homicide, murder, murder. (If you
don't believe it, go down there and look at those cards.) "Holy cat!"
says my friend to himself, "comparatively little of this crime stuff
gets into the papers, after all, don't it? I never heard of any of these
cases."

Enters court room. Takes a seat. Room soon filled. Now in my friend's
experience as a petit juror he had found himself among a rather
grotesque company of very small characters, frequently somewhat seedy in
outward effect. Here he was much struck by the decidedly first-rate
quality in appearance of practically every man in the room. Also,
before, he had observed with a good deal of annoyance that a court of
law could consume about twenty-nine times the time in accomplishing a
very simple matter that would be devoted to a thing of similar
consequence in any practical business office. Here in this flourishing
mill for dealing with capital crime the clerk of the court (or whatever
you call him) began to call the roll of jurors present fifteen minutes
before the hour set for opening of court. And so did affairs proceed
with well-oiled despatch.

"Oyez-mumble-jumble-jabber-jabber-yah-meow-wow-jumble-jabber-jumble" (or
whatever the devil it is), sang out the attendant who cries out that.
Everybody at once gets to his feet. In comes his corpulent Honor,
swinging along briskly, his gown flowing out behind, and mounts to his
wooden-canopied throne. A large, glossy, rather handsome face, neatly
cropped dark moustache, eye-glasses swinging from a broad black ribbon.
General effect what might be called that of a heavy-weight "club man,"
looks as if he might be quite a hearty fellow when out with "the boys."

Door opens at back of room. Sound of marching steps. Then are seen
coming along through a zoo-like cage round two sides of the room three
figures, burly civilian-clothed one in the middle, uniformed officer
fore and aft. They line up this side of a rail fencing the jurors off
from an area before the Judge. Burly figure is very well dressed. Stands
solidly on his feet, eyes trained directly on the Judge. Holds a dark
soft hat in his hands which he clasps behind his back. What from a
position somewhat to the rear can be seen of the side of his face
reveals a heavy scar, the result evidently of a knife slash across one
cheek. The Judge puts his palms together and addresses this person. "You
are charged with murder," he begins. He says it rather gently, in a
somewhat chiding manner, as though he had said, "Bad fellow, bad
fellow." Just then, "For the defendant!" calls out an attendant, and
another figure hurries forward.

The defendant's attorneys have not appeared, it seems. Their case is not
quite prepared. A postponement is asked. "Why is it not prepared?" asks
the Judge. The defendant speaks out. Declares his attorney has not been
paid. Judge's reply is that the attorney provided for him is an able
man, who will see that all his rights are observed. Grants postponement
until the next morning, positively no further. Officer by his side
plucks defendant's coat tail, and starts him off back through the cage.
As he goes he is heard to say that his attorney will not be there in the
morning either.

And as he turns, my friend gets, with a shock, a full-face view of him.
He had never expected anybody off the melodramatic stage to _look_ so
much like a murderer. Scarey, that face, a countenance almost majestic
in its ruthlessness and force: gangster, gunman, typically personified.

Jurors excused until ten-thirty next day. As they move toward the door,
two attractively dressed young women arise from the rear. "Who are the
ladies?" asks one. "Friends of the defendant," says another.

Next day, game called sharp on the stroke of the clock. Following
preliminaries of the day before, attendant spins that little roulette
wheel sort of an affair. Looks at slip thus drawn. "John Cole," he
cries. Mr. Cole passes round behind jury box, reappears in far corner at
left of Judge. "Rigmarole-rigmarole-solemnly swear, rigmarole," chaunts
attendant there, thrusting very dilapidated Bible before him. Mr. Cole
takes what later will be the witness chair.

Assistant district attorney arises and explains the case to him. The
charge is murder in the first degree. The prosecution must rely largely
on the testimony of an accomplice.

Defendant sits in whispered consultation with his attorney, his arm
almost around him. As prosecutor seats himself, attorney for the defense
gets up to put Mr. Cole through his paces. A fat, oily-looking man, with
(it is evident) a browbeating manner in reserve.

Has Mr. Cole, or anyone "near and dear" to him, recently met with any
"accident" at the hands of robbers? No. He will not, then, have a
revengeful feeling toward any person charged with crime? Not at all.
Would he give the same weight to the "story" of a "self-confessed thief
and murderer" that he would to the testimony of a "man of probity"?
Probably not. Now, doubtless, Mr. Cole is a reader of newspapers. He
has, of course, seen this "literature" (with a sneer), this "newspaper
hysteria" about a "c-r-i-m-e wave" (tongue in cheek). Well, can Mr. Cole
go into the jury box and look at this case detached from the
"atmosphere" now "being created by the newspapers"? Finally, is Mr. Cole
acquainted with anyone connected with the police department?

Mr. Cole, for some reason, strikes out.

Third man accepted. He comes around from behind it to enter the jury
box. At the gateway, while defendant stands and faces him, some more
rigmarole-mumble-jumble business.

Suddenly my friend is called. His business? asks district attorney. A
writer, he replies. Defendant and his attorney exchange strange glances.
Undoubtedly there is something low and suspicious about a fellow with
such a business. Attorney for the defense comes forward hurriedly. Soon
takes my friend in hand. He at once adopts the sarcastic. My friend's
work must require unusual "observation." He must be "gifted" with "great
powers of de-duct-shun" (said out of one corner of his mouth). Of
course, he has too a "fine imagination." By the way, what is the nature
of his writing? Has he written any novels?

No, my friend says, he is a humorous writer. "A what?" exclaims the
lawyer, his mouth remaining open. Then, "Like Don Mark_ee_?" "Somewhat,"
says my friend. Lawyer visibly pales. Withdrawing toward counsel table,
looks back at the accused, who vigorously shakes his head.

"Excused by per-emptory challenge," utters lawyer, dropping into his
chair.




CHAPTER III

QUEER THING, 'BOUT UNDERTAKERS' SHOPS


Queer thing, that, about undertakers' shops! I don't remember to have
been struck by undertakers' shops in San Francisco. Maybe they have none
there--because, as you'll see, it's a queer thing about them.

Now in Indianapolis undertaking is a very fashionable affair. People
there, apparently, want "class" in the matter of being finally disposed
of. They believe, evidently, with the author of the popular little idyl,
"Urn Burial," that "Man is a noble animal, splendid in ashes and pompous
in the tomb."

The most aristocratic street in that city is named North Meridian
Street. A street, until a short time ago, entirely of stately lawns and
patrician homes--mansions. Of late, a little business, shops of the most
distinguished character, has been creeping up this street from
down-town. Notably, de luxe motor car salesrooms, studios of highly
Ã¦sthetic photographers, and particularly palatial undertaking
establishments. They are, these last, wondrous halls, which surely none
could enter but those who (in life) had been rich in treasure. Features
of the city are they--"sights."

But here's the riddle:

Strolling about New York, from river to river, uptown and down, one
might readily fancy that here only the poor pass out of the world. Or
that if the rich and fashionable ever die their bodies are mysteriously
spirited away to destinations unknown; or are secretly preserved
(presumably by some taxidermal process) in their homes.

Why? Well, where on Fifth Avenue is an undertaker's? True, a man I know
declares there is a single one there. I am unable to find it. Where on
any fine street of the metropolis? Why, yes; as a rare phenomenon. You
do know, of course, that enormous place on upper Broadway. Sign says
branches in Paris, London, Berlin, Petrograd.

Viewed through the great windows interior presents somewhat the effect
of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. In foreground large harp, equally
huge Chinese vase--probably of the Tang Wang period, on great marble
pedestal enormous bronze of a mounted Diana repelling with spear attack
of ferocious animal resembling tiger. Appropriateness of this sculpture
somewhat puzzling. On wall, somewhat further within, immense tapestry.
One door labelled "Delivery Entrance." All of this, of course, is
magnificence as much as even the most covetous would crave.

But in New York this august undertaking hall is an anachronism. Here,
for some reason mysterious, it is in shabby neighborhoods that the
"parlors" of undertakers abound. You may find them sprinkled all about
the lower East Side. Frequent on Hudson Street, and, say, on Varick.
Quaint and curious places, these. Very human in their appeal. Tiny
places, most of them.

One such cozy crib I know on Greenwich Avenue. Has a stained glass
screen in the window, suggesting a good deal the style of window
ornamentation popular with that American institution lately
deceased--the saloon. The social spirit rife in small undertaking shops,
at least in some of them, is pleasant to observe. Business there not
being pressing, and life moving in these inns of death in a leisurely
and quiet current, neighborly amenities appear to be much cultivated.

This place of which I speak has, particularly in the evenings, much the
air of a club, where choice spirits of the locality foregather to
discuss politics, it may be, and the more engrossing forms of sport,
such as boxing. And perhaps relish a little game at cards. I often pass
this place at night and feel a warmth of spirit at the hum of jovial
social contact within.

I like, too, the way the undertakers' shops of the humble and obscure
carry on cheek by jowl with the familiar, homely, friendly things of
life. This gives Death a neighborly sort of air. On my walks in that
quarter I always give a friendly glance to the windows of a "Cremation
Ass'n" on Eighth Avenue, on one side of it a delicatessen shop, on the
other a "loan office," in the basement below a plumber.

Attractive, too, is it to consider how founders of tidy undertaking
houses have become personages and are held in revered esteem. For they
are not, it would seem, like unto those who have established just
ordinary businesses. This I will show you:

At a corner of Twenty-third Street, over a telegraph office, is an
establishment of some caste. Window legend reads:
"Undertakers--Cremations--Night and Day--Interments in all Cemeteries."
The last phrase reminds me of the way my old friend James Huneker used
to date his letters to me from Brooklyn. They began, "Flatbush by the
C--emeteries." But that's not the point. It's a pity the alert English
writer who recently visited us and discovered a statue of General Grant
in Grant Park, overlooking the Blackstone (where nobody had ever seen
one before), and that the huge bust of Washington Irving in Bryant Park,
behind the New York Public Library, was an effigy of Father George
Washington--it's a rotten shame E. V. Lucas missed this corner while
here.

Because when you go round this corner you are to look up just above the
level of your head. (Though I'm afraid you neglect to do this.) There on
a ledge is a grand sight. It's a bust of God. Fact! Anyhow, looks just
like pictures of God William Blake used to make. Old gentleman. Noble
brow. Patriarchal beard, flowing out in a pattern of rhythmical
waves--most realistically mildewed by time and weather.... But, no;
inquiry reveals that it's a likeness of the founder of this "old
established" undertaking concern.

Then there's that place a short step down Eighth Avenue. It declares on
its sign that it is the "original" house bearing the name of the
Reverend gentleman who conducts it. When you look through the glass in
the door you view just within, displayed on an ornamental easel, a
life-size crayon portrait, enlarged from a photograph, of a
distinguished-looking person wearing brown Dundreary whiskers and a top
hat. One corner of the portrait is gracefully draped in an American
flag.

Yes; you'd be surprised how strong undertakers are on patriotism. Hard
by here, next door to a dentist advertising "painless extraction," you
find a firm of "Funeral Directors" where conspicuous among such
ornaments as tall, bronze lamps with big shades, a spittoon, a little
model of a casket and an urn, is a large bronze bust of Abraham Lincoln.
A plate says: "No Charge for Rooms or Chapels for Funerals." And above
stairs is seen a row of somewhat ecclesiastical stained-glass windows.
Though we are given to understand by an advertisement that the
atmosphere of these chapels is "non-sectarian."

Then over on Third Avenue (where there are lots and lots of undertakers)
is a place. Always sitting just within the doorway, very silent, a
stout, very solemn individual wearing a large, black derby hat and big,
round, green-lens spectacles. Above him on the wall a framed lithograph
in colors of George Washington--beside it a thermometer. In the window a
rubber-plant. Rubber-plants varying in size from infant to elephant are
in the windows of all undertakers. The symbolism of this decoration I
know not. Beside the plant an infant's white casket, proclaimed by a
poster which leans against it to be composed of "purity metal." In some
places the casket, perhaps not of purity metal, is protected by being
enclosed in a glass case. The name of the proprietor of this shop, as
given on his sign, ends in "skey." Set in the door-frame is the usual
"Night Bell." And, as always in undertakers' shops, the card of a
"notary public" is displayed. Next door "Family Shoes" are featured.

Only yesterday afternoon I was looking in at the window of an undertaker
on Second Avenue, one I had just found. Along the curb before the door
a string of rather frayed and wobbly-looking "hacks," with a rusty-black
hearse at the head. Horses to these vehicles drowsy in disposition,
moth-eaten in effect as to pelt, and in the visibility of their
anatomical structure suggesting that they might have been drawn by
Albert DÃ¼rer in some particularly melancholy mood.

In groups along the edge of the sidewalk, conversing in subdued tones,
the Dickensesque drivers of this caravan. Tall and gaunt, some; short
and stout, others. Skirt coat on one, "sack" coat on another. Alike in
this: frayed and rusty and weather-beaten, all. And hard, very hard of
countenance. Each topped by a very tall, and quite cylindrical hat of
mussed, shoddy-black, plush texture. Hangovers, so to say, these
figures, from New York's hansom-cab days, or the time in London of the
"four-wheeler."

No, not altogether. There was something piquant--Villonesque, or
jovial--Rabelaisian, about the pickpockets of that tribe. These solemn
mummers strike a ghoulish note. But at the same time, out here in the
sane and cheerful sunlight, they don't look real. Create an odd
impression. Strikes you as about as queer, this bunch, as if a lot of
actors from a melodrama should turn up in the street with their makeup
on and gravely pretend to belong to real life.

"Perhaps," I thought, "there is a funeral, or something, going on
inside, and I should not be gaping in at this window."

Out of doorway pops little, rotund man, oily countenance. "Are you
looking for anybody?" he asks.

"Here," I said inwardly, "is where I get moved on." No, I told him, I
was just observing his window.

"Ah!" he cried, immensely flattered. He waved his hand back toward a
couple of little, marble crosses with hearts carved in relief on the
base. "You don't often see that, do you? Do you, now? They're sixty
years old. Made out of a single piece!"

But the saddest thing about undertakers' shops is to go by where was one
long familiar to you and find it gone. There was a splendid little place
which it was a great consolation to me to admire. That building is now
given over to an enterprise called "The Goody Shop." Its lofty dignity
and deep eloquence are gone! It looks like a department store. It is
labelled, with the blare of a brass band, "The Home of Pussy Willow
Chocolates."




CHAPTER IV

THE HAIR CUT THAT WENT TO MY HEAD


I did not expect anything in particular when I went in. Though, indeed,
it is a very famous place. That is, the hotel is--the Brevoort.

The name itself, Brevoort, is very rich in romantic Knickerbocker
associations. Probably you know all about that. Or, possibly, you don't
know--or have forgotten. Well, you do know how Broadway curves around
there at Tenth Street. That ought to recall Hendrick Brevoort to you.
His farm was all about this neighborhood. Caused this kink, he did, so
it is said.

This valorous descendant of the old burgher defied the commissioners to
destroy his homestead, which lay in the proposed path of Broadway. Or to
cut down a favorite tree which blocked the intended course of Eleventh
Street. Stood at his threshold with a blunderbuss in his trembling old
hands (so the story has it), when the workmen arrived to carry out their
instructions to demolish the house--and carried his point so
effectively that Broadway was deflected from its course, while Eleventh
Street between Broadway and Fourth Avenue was never completed. Grace
Church, which now stands at about where valiant Henry stood that day,
was built by a descendant of his, the architect also of St. Patrick's
Cathedral.

I like to think of these matters sometimes when I enter the cool cream
beauty of this ancient frame hostelry.

Also of another Henry Brevoort, a descendant of the original proprietor
of the farm in New Netherland, who built the substantial old double
house at the corner of Ninth Street and Fifth Avenue. Fine iron
balconies, pillared door, within a small green enclosure, and a walled
garden to one side: all preserved.

Here was held (in 1840) the first masked ball given in New York. An
affair of picturesque celebrity, on account of the occasion it furnished
a famous beauty of the day, Miss Mathilda Barclay, daughter of Anthony
Barclay, the British consul, to elope in fancy dress, domino and mask
with a certain young Burgwyne of South Carolina, of whom her parents had
unamiable views. She went as Lalla Rookh and he as Feramorz, and in
this disguise they slipped away from the ball, at four in the morning,
and were married. That, it seems to me, is the way for a man who does
not enjoy solemn ceremonies to be happy while getting married.

Across the way, at the corner of Eighth Street, the mellow white hotel
maintains the distinguished name, and touches "the Avenue" with a very
aromatic French flavor. Famous for its cuisine, largely patronized by
the transient French population of the city, a habitual port of call of
many painters and writers, the scene of the annual Illustrators' Ball,
and so on.

I like within the frequent spectacle of gentlemen of magnificent bulk
and huge black beards, in general effect impressively suggesting the
probability of their all being Academicians. I like the fact (or the
hypothesis) that all the waiters are Looeys and Sharses and Gastongs. I
like the little marble-top tables with wire spindle legs. I like the
lady patrons (Oh! immensely) who are frequently very chic (and with
exquisite ankles). I like the young gentlemen customers, who (many of
them) look exactly as though their faces were modelled in wax, and who
wear the sort of delicate moustaches that are advertised in _Vanity
Fair_.

But even more I like the quaintness of the scene without doors. There
along the curb, you recall, stand (in summer beneath the pleasant
greenery of drooping trees), awaiting hire, a succession of those
delightful, open, low-swung, horse-drawn vehicles, victorias, which were
the fashionable thing at the period named by Mrs. Wharton "The Age of
Innocence." The romantically leisurely drivers of these unbelievably
leisurely craft are perfectly turned out to be, so to say, in the
picture. They affect coachmen's coats (piquantly tempered by age) with
large silver buttons and, in mild weather, top hats constructed of
straw, painted black. In some instances these coachmen are
"colored"--which is a very pleasant thing, too, I think.

This hotel, naturally, has figured in a number of pieces of fiction. In
Samuel Merwin's novel "The Trufflers" it is the Parisian, where
Greenwich Village, when in funds, dines, lunches, breakfasts in the
little rooms which you enter from the Avenue, directly under the wide
front steps, or from the side street through the bar, and where Upper
West Side, when seeking the quaintly foreign dissociated from squalor,
goes up the steps into the airy eating rooms with full length hinged
windows to dine. And where (in this book) the young lady whose blooming
presence in the barber shop in the basement invites you to manicure
attentions gives rise to some very dramatic occurrences. The place, this
shop, of Marius (as called in the story), "the one barber in New York
who does not ask 'Wet or dry.'"

Now I had plumb forgotten about this barber's celebrity in fiction when
the other day I entered this shop. And I was struck with embarrassment
by the immediate attentions of so very distinguished a figure as that
which sprang forward to assist me out of my coat. I thought surely this
gentleman must be some kind of an Ambassador, who had perhaps mistaken
me for the President. A slimmish man, obviously very French. Amazingly,
overwhelmingly polite. Fine, a very fine beard. Long. Swept his chest.
Pointed. Auburn. Wavy. Silken. Shot delicately with grey. Beautifully
kept. Responded gently to the breeze--waving softly to and fro. A most
beautiful beard--oh, my! And a glorious crown of hair! It rose from the
line of its parting in a billowing wave, then fell with a luxuriant and
graceful sweep to his ear. Only when he had tucked me in the chair could
I realize that this must be the head barber. I had never before had the
honor of being served by, or even of having seen himself, the proprietor
here.

Then I mentioned Mr. Merwin's book. He took from a drawer several copies
of _The Saturday Evening Post_, in which periodical the story had
appeared serially, proudly to exhibit them to me. So it was we fell to
chatting of his place. He had been here some sixteen or eighteen years.
Before he had opened his shop this room had been several tiny rooms;
Cleveland Moffett had for a time occupied them as a residence, and had
here written his first book. My friend gayly produced a copy of an old
magazine article by Mr. Moffett in which mention was given the shop.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shaved, I was straightened up to have my hair trimmed. And, being for a
moment free to look about. I spied a card on the wall. It said:

      SILK HATS IRONED
            25_Â¢_
    COUP-DE-FER-AU CHAPEAU

But, my goodness! That was not all. No, indeed!

_This very man who was cutting my hair_ had cut the hair of General
Joffre--when he had his hair here in the United States. At "Mr. Frick's
house," where they were guests, he had attended the distinguished party
on its mission here. He would go in the morning, stay until they had
gone forth for the day; return in the afternoon, and spruce them up for
their evening out.

And what did they say, these great men of might?

Well, Joffre didn't say much. They were always out late--hurry out
again. He shaved some of them "almost in the bath." That fellow, the
Blue Devil,--one leg--cane--but back and forth from his bath quick like
anybody. He was the most talkative:

"I could not but laugh at what he told me. I asked, 'Do you speak
English?' 'No,' he said, 'but I ought to.' 'How is that?' I asked.
'Because,' he said, 'I'm half American.' 'Oh!' I said, 'your father then
was American and your mother French?' 'No,' he said. 'Ah!' I say, 'then
your mother was American and your father was French.' Do you
understand? I say that to him. 'No,' he say; 'no.' 'What then?' I ask.
'Why,' he say, 'I have one leg in France and one leg in America.' I
could not but laugh. Do you understand?"

When the visitors had departed Mr. Frick asked my friend for his bill.
"Oh, no!" he said; "he would take nothing but the great honor for his
little services."

My hair cut was finished. As I paid him (there being in this case, I
felt, no such great honor for his little services), he showed me a
drawing on the wall of a poodle he had one time owned. It had died. Very
sad. He was very fond of dogs. Of bred dogs, that is. He bred them
himself. He handed me his card as a professional dog fancier. It read:

                   CHINK A TU KENNELS
    CHOW CHOWS, PEKINGESES, POMERANIANS, ALL COLORS
              FROM PRICE WINNING STOCK
               MINIATURE SPECIMENS
        AT STUD. PEKINGESE, WONDERFUL SON OF WENTY
             OF HYDEGREE. FEE REASONABLE.
    AT STUD. LORD CHOLMONDELEY III SON OF CHAMPION
                 LORD CHOLMONDELEY II.
               TOY DOGS BOARDED
                  MME. HENRI GRECHEN

Yes, that morning he had done "some manicure work" for his dogs. She
looked up, the manicurist (milk-white blonde, black velvet gown), and
said, "Do you use the clippers?"

He: "Yes, of course. But not powder and polish. Quick, they want. Not
hold hands for hour--conversation about best show in town."

He bowed, very low, as I crossed his threshold. I turned and bowed, very
low, to him. A man of many parts and a barber illustrious in his
profession. It was some time before my head cooled off.




CHAPTER V

SEEING MR. CHESTERTON


Somewhat later in this article I am going to present an "interview" (or
something like that) with Gilbert E. Chesterton. At least I hope I am
going to present it. Yesterday it looked as though I might have to get
up my interview without having seen Mr. Chesterton. Though today the
situation appears somewhat brighter. "Seeing" Mr. Chesterton (on his
visit over here, at any rate) seems to be a complicated matter.

As anything which gives some view of the workings of the Chestertonian
machinery ought to be of interest to all who can lay claim to the happy
state of mind of being Chestertonites, I'll begin by telling the
proceedings so far in this affair. Then as matters progress to supply me
with more material (if they do progress) I'll continue.

I one time wrote an article in which I told with what surprising ease I
saw Mr. Chesterton several years ago in England. Without acquaintances
in England, some sort of a fit of impudence seized me. I wrote Mr.
Chesterton a letter, communicating to him the intelligence that I had
arrived in London, that it was my belief that he was one of the noblest
and most interesting monuments in England; and I asked him if he
supposed that he could be "viewed" by me, at some street corner, say, at
a time appointed, as he rumbled past in his triumphal car. Mrs.
Chesterton replied directly in a note that her husband wished to thank
me for my letter and to say that he would be pleased if I cared to come
down to spend an afternoon with him at Beaconsfield. Mr. Chesterton, I
later recollected, had no means readily at hand of ascertaining whether
or not I was an American pickpocket; but from the deference of his
manner I was led to suspect that he vaguely supposed I was perhaps the
owner of the New York _Times_, or somebody like that.

This escapade of my visit to Overroads I suppose it was that put into
the head of the editor of _The Bookman_ the notion that I was a person
with ready access to Mr. Chesterton. So I was served with a hurry-up
assignment to see him and to deliver an article about my seeing him for
the March number of the magazine before that issue, then largely in the
hands of the printers, got off the press. Thus my adventures, the
termination of which are at present considerably up in the air, began.

I at once wrote to Mr. Chesterton at the hotel where at the moment he
was in Boston. At the same time I wrote to Lee Keedick ("Manager of the
World's Most Celebrated Lecturers") at his office in New York. I had
picked up the impression that a lecture manager of this caliber owned
outright the time of a visiting celebrity whom he promoted, and that you
couldn't even telephone the celebrity without the manager's permission.
I didn't know that you couldn't telephone him anyway. Or that you
couldn't telephone the manager either.

Mr. Keedick very promptly replied that he would be very glad to do
everything that he could to bring about the interview. Or at least I
received a very courteous letter to this effect which bore a signature
which I took to be that of Mr. Keedick.

Mr. Chesterton was not to be back in New York until after a couple of
days. On the day set for his return to town I attempted to communicate
with Mr. Keedick by telephone. I am (I fear) a bit slow at the etiquette
of telephones, and I so far provoked a young woman at the other end of
the wire as to cause her to demand rather sharply, "Who are you?" This
matter adjusted amicably, Mr. Keedick it developed was so utterly remote
from attainment that I am not altogether sure such a person exists.
However, another gentleman responded cordially enough. Still, it seemed
to me (upon reflection) that in a matter of this urgent nature I had
been at fault in having failed to obtain more definiteness in the matter
of an appointment. So I went round to the manager's office. Very affably
received. Presented to a gentleman fetched for that purpose from another
room, where he had been closeted with someone else. Mr. Widdecombe, this
gentleman's name. Introduced as Mr. Chesterton's secretary. A pronounced
Englishman in effect. Said very politely indeed, several times, that he
was "delighted." Mr. Chesterton, however, was going away tomorrow. Would
return two days hence. Made, Mr. Widdecombe, very careful memorandum of
my address.

In due course of time thought I'd better look up Mr. Widdecombe
again--his memorandum might have got mislaid. Telephoned lecture bureau.
Satisfied young lady of honorable intentions. Explained matters all over
again to owner of agreeable masculine voice. Received assurance that Mr.
Widdecombe would be reminded at once of pressing state of affairs.
Disturbed by uneventful flight of time, called in at lecture bureau once
more. Learned that Mr. Widdecombe had not yet turned up. They, however,
would try to get him on the wire at the Biltmore for me. Yes, he was
there, but the fourth floor desk of the hotel said he had just gone into
Mr. Chesterton's room, and so (as, apparently, everyone ought to know)
could not be communicated with just now. He would call up shortly.
Lecture people suggested that I go round to the hotel. If Mr. Widdecombe
called in the meantime they'd tell him I was on my way over.

Thought I recognized the gentleman stepping out of the elevator at the
fourth floor. I did not know whether or not it was at all what you did
to lay hold of an Englishman in so abrupt a fashion, but concluded this
would have to be done. Mr. Widdecombe was all courtesy. The point,
however, was that "Mr. Chesterton had had an hour of it this morning.
Had had an hour of it." This afternoon he was getting off some work for
London. Then tomorrow, of course, would be his lecture. My matter _did_
seem to be urgent. But what could "we" do? Mr. Chesterton was a
"beautiful man." He had been so hospitable to the gentlemen of the
press. But if we should go in to him now he would say, "Dear me! Dear
me!" I readily saw, of course, that this would be an awful thing,
still....

Mr. Widdecombe was somewhat inclined to think that we "could do" this:
Suppose I should come to the Times Square Theatre the next afternoon, at
about a quarter to five, call for him at the stage entrance. Yes, he
thought we could arrange it that way. I could talk to Mr. Chesterton in
the taxi on the way back to the hotel. Perhaps detain him for a few
moments afterward. Mr. Widdecombe smiled very pleasantly indeed at the
idea of so happy a solution of our difficulties. And I myself was rather
taken by the notion of interviewing Mr. Chesterton in a cab. The fancy
occurred to me that this was perhaps after all the most fitting place
in the whole world in which to interview Mr. Chesterton.

So everything seems to be all right.

       *       *       *       *       *

New complications! (This is the following day.) In the morning mail a
letter from Mrs. Chesterton, saying so sorry not to have answered my
letter before, but it had been almost impossible to deal with the
correspondence that had reached them since they arrived in America. Her
husband asked her to say he would very much like to see me. And could I
call at the hotel round about twelve o'clock on Sunday morning? No
difficulty about meeting Mr. Chesterton in the kindness of that. But
Sunday might be quite too late for the purpose of my article. So I'll go
to the theatre anyway, and I'll certainly accept all Chesterton
invitations.

       *       *       *       *       *

A colored dignitary in a uniform sumptuously befrogged with gold lace
who commanded the portal directed me to the stage entrance. I passed
into a dark and apparently deserted passage and paused to consider my
next step. Before me was a tall, brightly lighted aperture, and coming
through this I caught the sound, gently rising and falling, of a rather
dulcet voice. A slight pause in the flow of individual utterance, and
directly following upon this a soft wave as of the intimate mirth of an
audience wafted about what was evidently the auditorium beyond. Just
then a figure duskily defined itself before me and addressed me in a
gruff whisper. I was directed to proceed around the passage extending
ahead, to Room Three. I should have passed behind a tall screen (I
recognized later), but inadvertently I passed before it, and suddenly
found myself the target of thousands upon thousands of eyes--and the
unmistakable back of Mr. Chesterton looming in the brilliance directly
before me.

Regaining the passage, I found a door labelled A 3. Receiving no
response to my knock, I opened it; and peered into a lighted cubby-hole
about one-third the size of a very small hall bed-room. The only object
of any conspicuousness presented to me was a huge, dark garment hanging
from a hook in the wall. It seemed to be--ah! yes; it was a voluminous
overcoat with a queer cape attached. So; I was in the right shop all
right.

I thought I ought to look around and try to find somebody. I wandered
into what I suppose are the "wings" of the theatre. Anyway, I had an
excellent view, from one side, of the stage and of a portion of one
gallery. The only person quite near me was a fireman, who paid no
attention whatever to me, but continued to gaze out steadily at Mr.
Chesterton, with an expression of countenance which (as well as I could
decipher it) registered fascinated incomprehension. I attempted to lean
against what I supposed was a wall, but to my great fright the whole
structure nearly tumbled over as I barely touched it. Perceiving a chair
the other side of the fireman, I passed before him, sat down, and gave
myself over to contemplation of the spectacle.

My first impression, I think, was that Mr. Chesterton was speaking in so
conversational a key that I should have expected to hear cries of
"Louder!" coming from all over the house. But from the lighted
expressions of the faces far away in the corner of the gallery visible
to me he was apparently being followed perfectly. I did not then know
that at his first public appearance in New York he had referred to his
lecturing voice as the original mouse that came from the mountain. Nor
had I then seen Francis Hackett's comment upon it that: "It wasn't, of
course, a bellow. Neither was it a squeak." Mr. Hackett adds that it is
"the ordinary good lecture-hall voice." I do not feel that this quite
describes my own impression of it the other afternoon. Rather, perhaps,
I should put the matter in this way. My recollection of the conversation
I had with him in 1914 at Beaconsfield is that there was a much more
ruddy quality to his voice then than the other day, and more, much more,
in the turn of his talk a racy note of the burly world.

Perhaps he feels that before a "representative" American audience one
should be altogether what used to be called "genteel." At any rate, I
certainly heard the other day the voice of a modest, very friendly,
cultivated, nimble-minded gentleman, speaking with the nicety of
precision more frequently observed among English people than among
Americans. There was in it even a trace of a tone as though it were most
at home within university walls. Though, indeed, I am glad to say, Mr.
Chesterton did not abstain from erudite, amused, and amusing allusions
to the society most at home in "pubs." And I cannot but suspect that
perhaps he would have been found a shade more amusing even than he was
if ... but, no matter.

One gentleman who has written a piece about his impressions of Mr.
Chesterton's lectures here felt that his audience didn't have quite as
much of a good time as the members of it expected to have. I heard only
a brief, concluding portion of one lecture. The portion of the audience
which came most closely before my observation were those seated at the
well filled press table, which stood directly between the speaker and
me. These naÃ¯ve beings gave every evidence of getting, to speak
temperately, their money's worth.

Though Mr. Chesterton turned the pages of notes as he spoke, he could
not be said to have read his lecture. On the other hand, it was clear
that he did not appreciably depart from a carefully prepared
disquisition.

The tumbled mane which tops him off seemed more massive even than
before. It did not, though, appear quite so tumbled. I think there had
been an effort (since 1914) to brush it quite nicely. Certainly it is
ever so much greyer. I think in my earlier article I said something like
this: "Mr. Chesterton has so remarkably red a face that his smallish
moustache seems lightish in color against it." While Mr. Chesterton's
face today could not be described as pale, it looks more like a face and
less like a glowing full moon. The moustache is darker against it; less
bristling than before, more straggly.

A couple of our recent commentators upon Mr. Chesterton have taken a
fling at the matter of his not being as huge as, it seems to them, he
has been made out to be. I remember that when I saw him before I was
even startled to find him more monstrous than even he had appeared in
his pictures. He appears to take part a good deal in pageants in
England; and recent photographs of him as Falstaff, or Tony Weller, or
Mr. Pickwick, or somebody like that, have not altogether squared up with
my recollection of him. True, he has not quite the bulk he had before;
but it is a captious critic, I should say, who would not consider him
sufficiently elephantine for all ordinary purposes.

He was saying (much to the delight of the house) when I became one of
the audience, that he would "not regard this as the time or the occasion
for him to comment upon the lid on liquor." A bit later in the course of
his answer to the question he had propounded, "Shall We Abolish the
Inevitable," he got an especially good hand when he remarked: "People
nowadays do not like statements having authority--but they will accept
any statement without authority." He concluded his denunciation of the
idea of fatalism with the declaration: "Whatever man is, he is not in
one sense a part of nature." "He has committed crimes, Crimes," he
repeated--with gusto in the use of the word,--"and performed heroisms
which no animal ever tried to do. Let us hold ourselves free from the
boundary of the material order of things, for so shall we have a chance
in the future to do things far too historic for prophecy."

I darted back toward Room Three, ran into Mr. Widdecombe, we wheeled,
and saw the mountain approaching. Whereas before, this off-stage place
had been deserted, now the scene was populous--with the figures of
agitated young women. Mr. Widdecombe, however, with much valiance
secured Mr. Chesterton. "Yes, yes," he said, and (remarkable remark!),
"I had the pleasure of meeting you in England." He glanced about rather
nervously at the dancing figures seeking to obtain him, and led the way
for me into the dressing room. Mr. Widdecombe pulled the door to from
without.

I am far from being as large as Mr. Chesterton, but the two of us
closeted in that compartment was an absurdity. Mr. Chesterton eclipsed a
chair, and beamed upon me with an expression of Cheeryble-like
brightness. Upon his arrival in New York he had declared to the press
that he would not write a book of his impressions of the United States.
I asked him if, after being here a week or so, he had changed his mind
as to this determination. "Not definitely," he said, "not definitely.
But, of course, one could never tell what one might do." He might write
a book about us, then? Yes, he might. Did he think it at all likely that
he would take up residence over here? A very joyous smile: "One's own
country is best," he said. Rumors had several times been afloat that he
had entered the Roman Catholic Church. Would he say whether there was
any likelihood of his doing this? He was an Anglican Catholic, he
replied. Not a Roman Catholic--yet. That was not to say that he might
not be--if the English Church should become more Protestant. What was
his next book to be? Had he any project in mind of going to Turkey, or
Mexico, or some such place? No; the only books he was working on at
present were a new volume of short stories and a book (smiling again
widely) on eugenics. He knew Mr. Lucas, of course? "Yes, fine fellow."
Did he know Frank Swinnerton? No. What was.... But the door was popped
open. Several persons were waiting for him, among them Mrs. Chesterton.
I helped him into the cape-coat. Stood behind the door so that when it
was opened he could get out. "You know Mr. Holliday," he said to Mrs.
Chesterton. "Thank you, so much," he said to me. And was whisked away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sunday at the hotel. He was late in arriving. I thought it would be
pleasanter to wait a bit out in front. Expected he would drive up soon
in a taxi. Then I saw him coming around the corner, walking, rolling
slowly from side to side like a great ship, Mrs. Chesterton with him--a
little lady whose stature suggested the idea of a yacht gracefully
cruising alongside the huge craft. I wonder if, nowadays when most
writers seem to try to look like something else, Mr. Chesterton knows
how overwhelmingly like a great literary figure he looks.

When we were seated, I asked if he had any dope on his "New Jerusalem"
book. He began to tell me how surprised he had been to find Jerusalem as
it is. But the substance of this you may find in the book. He expressed
sympathy with the idea of Zionism. Remarked that he "might become a
Zionist if it could be accomplished in Zion." All that he could find to
tell me about his "New Jerusalem" was that it had been "written on the
spot." Seemed very disinclined to talk about his own books. Said his
feeling in general about each one of them was that he "hoped something
would happen to it before anybody saw it."

His surprise at Jerusalem suggested to me the question, Had he been
surprised at the United States--what he had seen of it? But he dodged
giving any "view" of us. His only comment was on the "multitudinous
wooden houses."

Had he met many American authors? The one most recently met, a day or so
ago in Northampton, though he had met him before in England, was a
gentleman he liked very much. He was so thin Mr. Chesterton thought the
two of them "should go around together." His name? Gerald Stanley Lee.

But there is not a particle more of time that I can spend on this
article.




CHAPTER VI

WHEN IS A GREAT CITY A SMALL VILLAGE?


How many times you have noticed it! Regular phenomenon. Suddenly, within
a few hours, the whole nature of the great city is changed--your city
and mine, New York or Chicago, or Boston or Buffalo or Philadelphia.

Though nobody seems to say much about it afterward. Just sort of take
the thing for granted.

It is just like Armistice Night, every once in awhile. Total strangers
suddenly begin to call each other "Neighbor." Voices everywhere become
jollier. Numerous passersby begin to whistle and sing. People go with a
skip and a jump. Catcalls are heard. Groups may be seen all around going
arm in arm, and here and there with arms about necks. Anybody speaks to
you merrily. Merrily you speak to anybody. All eyes shine. Roses are in
every cheek. Hurry is abandoned. Small boys run wild. Nobody now objects
to their stealing a ride. It is fun to see their swinging legs dangling
over the tail of every wagon. Sour human nature is purged. Good humor
reigns. Hurrah!

I mean on the night of a big snow.

This year it looked for long as though we were going to be done out of
this truly Dickensean festival. Seemed like we were going to be like
those unfortunate people in Southern California, who never have any
winter to cheer them up. How tired they must get of their wives and
neighbors, with it bland summer all the time. Perhaps that is the reason
there is such a promiscuous domestic life out there.

Young Will Shakespeare had the dope. He piped the weather for jollity
and pep. "When blood is nipp'd"--"a merry note!"

You remember how it was this time: Spring all winter--and spring fever,
too, a good many of us had all the while. (My doctor said it was
"malaria" with me.) We were congratulating ourselves that we were going
to "get by" without any "blizzards" at all this year. We became "softy."
We guarded ourselves with our umbrellas against the shower. We became
prudent. And what is it Stevenson says of that? "So soon as prudence has
begun to grow up in the brain, like a dismal fungus, it finds its first
expression in a paralysis of generous acts. The victim begins to shrink
spiritually; he develops a fancy for parlors with a regulated
temperature, and takes his morality on the principle of thin shoes and
tepid milk."

Then one night there came a tinkle in the temperature as of sleigh
bells. And the town, the world sank into a soft blanket of white. Were
you out then? Ah! you should have been. You were not, I hope, in a
parlor with a regulated temperature.

Well, anyhow, everybody else was out. The cross streets of the big city
had "all to oncet" taken on the air of a small town "sociable." Shadowy
multitudes seemed to sprout up out of the ground. The sidewalks,
especially those usually so deserted at this hour, now ahum with dark
busy bowing figures, rang and clanged gayly with the sound of scoop and
shovel. In the democratic, jovial, village-like spirit of the occasion,
many of the workers (those more staid and portly ones) removed their
coats. Every here and there an areaway held, in a holiday effect, a
cluster of bare-headed maid-servants--the "gallery" of the shovellers,
whose presence tended to make of the task of clearing the sidewalk a
night-hour lark.

Voices in the street, as you know, and laughter there, is never so
musical as above snow-stilled pavements. Then, too, cheery echoes are
abroad among the recesses between the houses, in the courts and down the
ways where packages are delivered. The shovellers good-naturedly banter
one another and pass a cordial jest with those who travel by. And every
here and there the rich contralto of negro mirth is heard.

I do not know that the city's parks are not a finer spectacle under snow
than in the summer--their dark glistening branches laden Ã  la Christmas
card, and, after dark, their festoons of lamps more twinkling and more
yellow than at any other time.

Along Broadway what a whirl! The street like an arena, hordes of
gladiators in doughty combat with the onslaught of the storm, snow-carts
banging and backing about (horses seem to stomp and snort and rear more
in a snowstorm than at any other time), new ridiculously miniature
"caterpillar tractors" performing like toy tanks at war, traffic in a
hilarious tangle, street cars crawling along looking more than ever
before like prodigious cat-eyed bugs. Here with a terrific buzz comes
one all dark furiously thrashing the snow from side to side by means of
revolving brooms beneath. The crowds an animated silhouette against the
whitened air. One wants to hop and shout one feels so much alive.

Lots of funny things happen. A taxicab there has got stuck in a drift.
It whirs in a passion. Wallows forward. Runs its nose up a little
hillock of hard crusted snow. Stops. Makes a fine hubbub. Slides back,
stilled, exhausted. Tries again. Same thing repeated. A pounding is
heard on the inside of the door. Chauffeur reaches back his hand to turn
handle of door. Something is wrong. He climbs down. Pulls at door.
Nothing doing. Door has apparently been sprung somehow. Taxi is now
observed to be a bit listed to one side. Pounding, louder than before,
again heard from inside. Conductor from nearby car comes to side of
chauffeur. Also policeman. All lay hold of each other and pull with
united effort at taxi door. Door flies open. Closely knit group of
chauffeur, conductor and policeman nearly tumbles backward into snow.
From cab door descends tall, elegant figure in evening clothes and top
hat. Followed by even more elegant figure of slender lady in opera
cloak. For some reason she appears to be very angry, and shakes her fist
at her three humble liberators. The couple seek some path, from the
trampled oasis where they stand, through the drifts to the sidewalk.
There is none. Her dazzling skirt she has caught high from the mess
about her feet. Perhaps a yard of pale yellow silken hose is revealed
above her satin pumps. Finally in desperation the two plunge forward,
taking gigantic steps, sinking knee-deep at every onward move,
tottering, swaying and at length fairly scrambling toward the haven of
the curb. The dozens along the sidewalk who have been held spellbound by
what they have found to be so delicious a comedy turn to one another
with delighted smiles--and move along again on their way.

It is things like this always happening all about which make snow-storm
nights in the city such a hippodrome affair, and all the world akin.

Over on the Avenue busses are busily pushing plows hitched on before.
There one has got stalled in a drift. It whirs and buzzes and backs and
starts and whirs and buzzes over and over again. No use, it seems.
Still, draped along the curb, the spectators stand, unmindful of the
gale, as absorbed as if at a Yale-Princeton game.
Buzzzzzzzzz--Whirrrrrrrrrrr--and away. She's off! A feeble cheer goes
up. And everybody starts onward again in better humor with himself for
having seen so entertaining a show.

It snowed the night through.

In the morning banks of snow breast-high through the side streets.
Through a narrow aisle down the middle of the roadway trucks cars and
wagons slowly go in single file. Moving thus all in a single line they
have something the effect of a circus parade--elephants and lion cages
and so on.

And lions remind me. It is always well to look at public statues and
outdoor pieces of sculpture the morning after a heavy snow. You are
likely to find them very comical apparitions. The celebrated literary
lions before the New York Public Library, for instance, wore throughout
the day after the first big snow of this winter ridiculous tall caps
pulled down very rakishly over their eyes.

Streaming from the direction of the railroad station were coming the
swarms of our commuter friends, the legs of many of them hoisting along
those prodigious "arctics" which are all the vogue nowadays. Isn't it
curious? There was a time when if you were obliged to wear glasses you
got them as nearly invisible as possible. If you were a man you felt
there was something shameful about having "weak" eyes. If a woman, you
"just knew" that glasses made you look "horrid." And when you wore
overshoes you got them as inconspicuous as possible. Now you affect
shell spectacles that can be seen a block away, and having huge lenses.
Now there is nothing smarter, apparently, than for a young woman with a
trim foot to come into town swaddled in floppers which fit her slim
ankles like a bucket.

Men are still shovelling and scraping away at the streets, a motley
army. What is it so many persons are pausing to smile at, others
hurrying on but with grinning faces turned back? It is at a gentleman
shoveller. Here recruited somehow among this gang of husky laborers is a
slim eccentric figure in a--yes, a frock coat, a derby hat, kid gloves,
and very tight trousers ... a quaint picture of the shabby genteel.
Walking very briskly back and forth, very upright in carriage, the small
of his back curved inward, he pushes his scraper before him holding it
by the very tip of the long handle--and as well as can be observed
doesn't scrape anything at all. His fellow workers regard him with surly
disgust and roughly bump into him at every opportunity. What story is
there, in that absurd, pathetic scene, what O. Henry tale of mischance
in a great city?

A wagon on a side street has got its wheels ground into the snow bank at
the side of the narrow cleared way. Such accidents are all about, and
everywhere men may be seen leaving their own affairs to give a helping
hand to a fellow being in sore straits. The visitation of a great snow
storm strikingly unites the bonds of the brotherhood of man.

Stalled for interminable periods in suburban trains and in traffic jams
hurried men give themselves up cheerfully to the philosophic virtue of
patience.

Vagabonds sent on errands two miles away return after three hours with
tales of the awful slowness of trolley cars. And on days of great snow
storms meet with Christian forgiveness.




CHAPTER VII

THE UNUSUALNESS OF PARISIAN PHILADELPHIA


I discovered the other day that Philadelphia is a very great deal nearer
to Paris than New York is.

How do I figure out that?

Plain enough. It's because New York women, buds and matrons, thinking
they are got up (or as the English say, "turned out") smart as anything,
are parading around in fashions today altogether passÃ©e.

You know the New York scene. And how for some considerable time now its
most--well, most apparent feature has been a--er, a hosiery display ...
unparalleled off the gay stage of musical comedy. Very, so to speak,
exhilarating that once was--the glistening spectacle of, moving all
about, those symmetrically tapering lines of pink and rose and orange
and pearl and taupe and heather tan and heather green and purple wool
and sheen of black and gloss of mottled snake and--and all that.

But, I am afraid, the eye over-long accustomed to the great Metropolitan
movie thriller of the fashionable streets had become somewhat dulled.

The Parisienne knew about the peculiar character of the eye, and that it
ceases to see with any emotional response at all that which remains
within its range of vision for any extended length of time. So she
(roguish witch!) alertly changed the picture.

I picked up by chance, during my two-hour run on the train, a copy of
one of our most dashing fashion journals. It was the "Forecast of Spring
Fashions" number. I opened it, at random, at the headline: "The Short
Skirt Has Had Its Day in Paris." Below was a jolly photograph (of a
stunning lady at the latest races at Auteuil) illustrating "the new
skirt length." Visible beneath the hem--a trim foot, and a bit of tidy
ankle.

Who was the fellow (with a gifted eye for the lasses) who spoke with
such delight of the tiny feet that "like little mice run in and out"?
And there was that other poet (what was his name? I declare! my
literature is getting awful rusty), who sang with such relish the charm
of feminine drapery "concealing yet revealing." Anyhow, you know what
I'm getting at.

I closed the magazine and forgot about the matter--until shortly after I
had come out of the Broad Street Station.

The modish scene I apprehended was, to an eye accustomed steadily for
some time to the natty abbreviations of Fifth Avenue, a refreshing, a
charming spectacle. I seemed suddenly to have left my "orchestra seat."
And to have returned again to a view of, so to put it, ladies in private
life.

Though, indeed, occasionally in the distance I caught a flashing glimpse
of, according to Paris decree, the obsolete skirt length.

Come to think of it, isn't this so, too: that there are in Philadelphia
more rose-cheeked damsels of hearty figure and athletic-heel swing than
you usually come across in other cities?

At any rate, there are quite a number of very unusual things about
"Phila," as I believe intimate friends of the city affectionately call
the place. Things which it may be you have not noticed lately--perhaps
because you haven't been there recently, or maybe because you live
there, and so see them every day.

One of the unusual things about Philadelphia is that so many ladies and
"gem'men" who do light housekeeping on and around Manhattan Island (in
other words "New Yorkers") apparently find it easier frequently to get
to Chicago, or Palm Beach, or London, or Santa Barbara than to journey
to Philadelphia. I suppose the reason for this state of mind is the same
as the cause of my sometimes feeling that it would be about as simple
for me to undertake a trip from the Grand Central to Buffalo as to get
from Times Square down to Fulton Street for a luncheon appointment. A
place which is only half an hour, or two hours away, is a place, you
think, that you can run down to any time. And--well, just at the moment
with everything so pressing and all that. To become keyed up about
taking a "real" trip is another matter.

And when I myself do get there I always feel that it is an unusual thing
that I have allowed so long a time to lapse since I came before. Because
it is so unusually pleasant and restful a ride that it makes me sore to
think what an unusually deuce of a thing I am put to every night going
home in the rush hour to Dyckman Street on the subway.

It is an unusual thing (or, at least, so it seems to me) that in
Philadelphia cards in windows advertising rooms to let should be (as
they are) labelled "Vacancies."

It is an unusual thing that here so many undertakers' shops should be
conducted in what appear to be private residences. It is an unusual
thing that there should be so many ways of paying your fare on the
street cars--in some you pay when you get on, in others when you get
off. It is an unusual thing that in Philadelphia there are more
different kinds of street lamps than (I suspect) there are in any other
city in the world. There are powerful arc lamps, high on tall poles,
cold white in their light. There are lower down, particularly pleasant
in the twinkle of their numbers in Washington Square, gas lamps glowing
a mellow yellow through their mantles. Various other kinds of lamps,
too. But the ones I like best are those squat fellows throughout
Independence Square. Octagonal iron-bound boxes of glass, small at the
base, wide at the top, with a kind of ecclesiastical derby hat of iron
as a lid. They somehow suggest to me the lamps which I fancy before Will
Shakespeare's Globe Theatre.

Here golden Diana with her bow does not poise high on her slender
Spanish tower. But from far above the "Public Buildings" Brother Penn
looks down on more banks, United States Mints, trust companies, firms
dealing in securities, places handling investments, and such-like
business concerns than (one has a feeling) can be found in any other
city in Christendom. There are too, I should guess, in Philadelphia
about as many different styles and periods of architecture as in any
other municipality between the two great seas: Georgian, Colonial,
bay-window, London brick row, ramshackle frame, modern mansion,
skyscraper, etc., etc., etc. And certainly I don't know where one could
go to count more different kinds of porches. Nor where one could find so
many such pleasant oddities of today as hitching-blocks, doorway
foot-scrapers, and those old friends of our childhood the front yard
stone storks.

And where, Oh, where! (not even in London) can one find so many alleys
to the square inch? Many of them, lanes of but a few blocks in length,
highly respectable, even aristocratic, quarters of the town. Such as
Camac Street, tucked away between Thirteenth and Twelfth Streets, one
block of it either side of Locust, and the home or haunt of those of
artistic persuasion. Here the famous Franklin Inn Club, the charming
Poor Richard Club, and divers other clubs of kindred spirit. Unusual
this quaint street of art in this: in fixing it up for its present
purpose its quaintness and its "artiness" have not been overdone. Far,
far finer in effect than New York's over eccentric alley of painters,
Washington Mews, its original loveliness has simply been restored. It is
as jolly to look upon as London's artist nook, Cheyne Row. Perhaps even
jollier.

Now another unusual thing about Philadelphia is that Philadelphians
standing within three blocks of the place can't tell you where South
Carlisle Street is. Professional Philadelphians, such as policemen,
firemen, postmen, street car men, can't do it. In the attempt they
contradict each other, and quarrel among themselves. For the benefit of
both Philadelphians and visitors to the city I will set down here
exactly the location of South Carlisle Street. West of Broad, south of
Pine, it runs one block from Pine to Lombard Street. After a jump, where
there isn't any of it, north of Market Street there is more of it.

But what the dickens is South Carlisle Street, and why should anybody
care where it is? Well, though it isn't in the books on Historic Shrines
of America it is a street you "hadn't ought to" miss. It's about twelve
feet (or something like that) from wall to wall. The doorways seem to be
about three feet wide. There, in South Carlisle Street, Philadelphia's
mahogany doors, fan-lights above, white pillars before, marble steps
below, her immaculate red brick, her freshly painted wooden shutters,
her gleaming brass knockers are in their most exquisite perfection.

A wealthy and cultivated gentleman or two "took up" the street a year or
so ago, decided to make their homes there, and it has become quite
"class." Same idea, more or less, that Mrs. W. K. Vanderbilt has
concerning the "exodus" of her set from Fifth Avenue to unheard-of
Sutton Place over among the tall yellow chimneys by New York's East
River.

Considering the great wealth in Philadelphia and its environs,
particularly those patrician environs lying toward Harrisburg, it is, I
think, unusual that you never see on the streets there a Pekingese or a
Pomeranian attended by a personage in livery.

Unusual, too, that in a city of the first class along the eastern
seaboard so few canes are "worn."

And, by the way, that's an unusual railroad service from Philadelphia to
New York. Conductor calls out: "Train for Newark and New York. Newark
first stop." Train slides a few feet--halts at West Philadelphia. Spins
along a bit again, and pulls up at North Philadelphia. Stops later along
the way at Trenton, Newark, and Manhattan Junction. I really do not see,
putting a wreck out of the calculation, where else it could stop.

I took from a boy in the Pennsylvania station a copy of one of New
York's most popular evening papers. It came apart in the middle.
Straightening it out, I caught a headline on the "Talks to Women" page.
It read "Short Skirts Remain." Below a cut of a beaming lass attired,
the caption said, in "frock of navy blue ruffled taffeta with short
sleeves and 'shorter' skirt."

When I came out onto the street the temperature (in skirts) seemed to
have risen since my departure a couple of days before.




CHAPTER VIII

OUR LAST SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT AS A FINE ART


I have just witnessed a revelation. At least, it was a revelation to me.
I'm keen on telling you all about it.

One of my earlier articles in this series had to do with the
establishment here and there in a great city of those gentlemen engaged
in the estimable business of packing you up for keeps--that is the
"parlors" of various sorts of "undertakers." I had been much struck by
the vast number of cozy little places catering, so to say, to the poor
and humble who have forever (as Stevenson puts it) "parted company with
their aches and ecstasies." And I had wondered at how very few places
there were in evidence on the streets to take care of the "remains" of,
in a manner of speaking, the first-cabin passengers in life, those who
have travelled through their days in a fashion de luxe. The
establishments of this type which now and then I did see were very
palatial indeed--and didn't look at all as though they would
countenance the corpse of just an ordinary person such as you and me.

Also, all the undertaking establishments visible to me in my goings and
comings about town were quite obviously undertaking establishments. They
displayed within and without the air, the accoutrements, the
paraphernalia traditionally associated with one's last social engagement
on earth, his funeral. They varied only in this: some were rich and
haughty in general effect, others simple and perhaps dingy in
appearance. But each and all of them looked as much like an undertaking
shop as a barber shop looks like a barber shop. You could not possibly
have mistaken any one of them for a Turkish bath establishment, or a
Carnegie library, or an office for steamship tickets.

As I say, I wrote that article telling all this and that about what
anybody may see any day as he goes about on his rounds through the thick
of the city. But when the article appeared--originally--it soon
developed that I was not abreast of undertaking matters at all. I had
not in the least kept track of the remarkable advances which have to
date been made in the art of being buried--and a very fine art, in the
advanced phases of the affair, it certainly has become. I did not even
know the present-day, the correct, name for what I, in so old-fashioned
a condition of mind, called an "undertaker's." No.

That word, "undertaker," has long, long ago been discarded by the Ã©lite
of the profession. What a queer word as a business title it was, anyway!
How did it originally ever come to be used in its mortuary relation? No
one in the business that I have asked has been able to tell me. And why
in the dim past when names were being given to trades did not this word,
undertaker, seem to be equally descriptive of the career of physician or
attorney? Indeed, does not he that sets himself the highly hazardous
task of saving a living fellow being from disease or the gallows
undertake to do more than he who merely performs the quiet office of
laying us away?

And then, oddly enough for its tragic associations, the word acquired in
our minds something of a ludicrous turn. It was reminiscent of Dickens,
of hired professional "mourners," and that sort of thing. At mention of
the word, a picture popped into our mind of a grotesquely angular being,
of sallow, elongated features and lugubrious manner, garbed in a rusty
frock coat and "stove pipe" hat, who put together before him the tips of
black-gloved fingers and spoke with a hollow sound. We would say to our
friends when they were feeling blue: "What's the matter with you? You
act like an undertaker."

Well, as doubtless you have noticed, the term "funeral director" more or
less recently pretty well superseded the word undertaker among
progressive concerns. It is a phrase much more in the modern spirit,
like "domestic science" for (what used to be) "household work,"
"modiste" for "dressmaker," "maid" for "hired-girl," "psychic" for
"fortune teller," "publicity engineer" for "press agent," and so on. And
it has a good, business-like, efficient sound.

Still (I discovered) to be buried by a funeral director is not the very
latest, the most fashionable thing. The really smart way nowadays of
bidding good-bye to the world is to go to the establishment of a
"mortician."

Yes; that's what the gentleman said in his very cordial letter: would I
care to look over a "real mortician's establishment in New York City?" I
replied that nothing could give me greater pleasure. So at the time
appointed a couple of days later his car came round for me.

When I told people of the visit I was about to make, they all laughed,
very heartily. Now that brings to one's attention a curious thing: why
should they laugh? Honestly, between you and me, think hard and tell me
what really there is funny about going to see a burial establishment?

Paradoxical indeed is the attitude of mind of practically everyone
toward this subject of being ushered out of life. Sundry totally
contradictory emotions are aroused in the very same person by slightly
different aspects of the same subject. If you remark that you are going
to spend the afternoon at the undertaker's that is awfully amusing. At
the same time, is not nearly everyone down in his heart a bit scared of
undertakers' shops? Uncomfortable, gruesome places, would not most of us
feel, to have next door?

At any rate, as we glided along I was told by the gentleman who had come
to fetch me that the feeling was very general that the presence of a
funeral director's establishment depreciated the value of property in
the immediate neighborhood. Though, he asserted, this popular idea
frequently had not at all been borne out in fact.

It developed (from his lively conversation) that nothing so much annoys
a funeral director, or a mortician, as for a visitor to pull old gags
which he thinks are smart--such, for instance, as the remark: "I see
your business is pretty dead." I gathered that this jocular pleasantry
was the stock joke of all near-wits who visited undertakers--I mean
morticians.

No; there is another thing which annoys these gentlemen (morticians)
even more than such punk puns as that. They deeply resent, I discovered,
any disrespectful allusion to their silent clients, such as calling them
"stiffs," or something like that. How would you, they ask, like to have
someone of yours--someone who but yesterday returned your heart's clasp,
now dumb and cold--made game of by such ribaldry? Certainly, I cannot
say that I should like it.

Another paradoxical contradiction! Tell me (if you can) what strange
spring of his being prompts a man to think it big and bold and hearty of
him to speak with such cynical contemptuousness of a fellow man returned
to rigid clay.

We had arrived at our destination, I was told. But I saw nothing, but
what was (seemingly) a rather handsome private residence, set in a
pleasant lawn. Though I did discern by the door a modest plate which
read (as I recall the name) "Wentworth Brothers," nothing more.
Wentworth Brothers might have been, for all the exterior evidence to the
contrary, architects, or teachers of dancing and the piano, or breeders
of pedigreed dogs, or dealers in antiques, or physical instructors, or
almost anything you please.

This I soon learned was the fundamental principle of the sensitive art
of the mortician--to scrap all the old stage properties of the bugaboo
type of undertaker.

We passed into a charming hall, light and cheerful, furnished in
excellent taste, altogether domestic in effect. A number of bright
looking people, apparently attached to the premises, were lightly moving
about. I had somewhat the sensation of having come to a most agreeable
afternoon tea.

I was presented to my host, as cheerful, wholesome and cordial a young
chap as anyone would care anywhere to see. The senior, he, of the
brothers. I had been a little depressed that morning, having a bad cold
and being fretted by a number of gloomy things, but as we proceeded
through the house my spirits picked up decidedly. I experienced a
feeling of mental and physical well-being, so attractive was everything
about.

A dainty reception room opened off the hall at the front. My impression
was of a nice amount of charming Colonial furniture. Altogether such a
room as you might see in an illustration in the magazine _House and
Garden_. Secluded back of this rooms having a brisk atmosphere and
serving as offices. Peopled by very trim and efficient looking young
people.

We descended to the "stock room," a most sanitary looking place of
cement floor, ceiling and walls, where was a large store of caskets of
many varieties. Behind this a spick and span embalming room which
(except for the two tables) somewhat suggested an admirable creamery.
Here I discovered that to the mind of the mortician towels belong to the
Dark Ages. The up-to-date way of drying hands is by holding them before
a blast of air turned on from a pipe.

We ascended to the third floor. Here were the chapels, rooms which might
have been designed to accommodate fashionable audiences attending
literary lectures. In connection with them a tiny "minister's study,"
not unlike the sanctum of a university professor. Also here small hotel
suites, each with bath attached, available for the bereaved from out of
town. Here, too, snug quarters for wakes. And a spacious chamber wherein
friends may sit for a little last visit with the departed. The dominant
article of furniture in this room an Empire lounge such as we see
supporting the figure of Madame RÃ©camier in the famous portrait by
David. A consummate refinement was shown me on this floor: telephones,
concealed behind panels in the wall, with no bells to jangle over-tried
nerves, but with a tiny red electric globe on the wall to light as the
signal.

The top floor a dormitory for male employees, having much the effect of
rooms for boys at college, gay soft cushions, pipes and mandolins
scattered about.

I lingered for a smoke and a chat with my host on the ground floor in an
oak panelled room like the library of a gentleman's club before leaving.

I came away with (I very much fear) an idea that I should like to go
back tomorrow and see some one of my friends so agreeably buried from
that place.




CHAPTER IX

WRITING IN ROOMS


I remember that I was somewhat surprised when E. V. Lucas expressed
surprise that I was writing in my room at the hotel where we both
happened to be at the same time for several days last summer. He
declared with an expression of sharp distaste that he could not write in
hotel rooms. But said he had no difficulty in writing on trains. That
rather got me, because I can't write at all on trains. And possibly
because I was a bit peeved at the easy way in which he spoke of doing
that exceedingly difficult thing, writing on trains, I asserted in reply
that anybody ought to be able to write in _any kind_ of a room. But I do
know, what every writer knows, that the particular room one may be in
can make a good deal of difference in the way one is able to write.

Of course, it does appear to be true that there are writers of a kind
that can write anywhere in any circumstances, apparently with equal
facility and their customary standard of merit, whatever that may be. I
suppose war correspondents must be like that, and reporters for daily
newspapers. We know that a good many war books were announced as having
been written in dugouts, trenches, pill-boxes, tanks, submarines,
hospitals, airplanes and so on. In the matter of some of them I should
not undertake to dispute that they had even been written in asylums.

I have known, and known well, men of that type of mind which seemed to
be so completely under control that at will it could be turned on or
off, so to say, like the stream from a water faucet. My friend Joyce
Kilmer had such a head. It has been told how some of his most moving
poems--for one instance "The White Ships and the Red"--were the result
of hurried newspaper assignments: how he could leave a poem in the
middle of its composition, go out and lunch heartily for two hours,
return and finish the writing of it; how early in his career he would
walk up and down a room of his home in suburban New Jersey at two in the
morning and dictate (without a pause) to his wife while carrying a
shrilly crying child in his arms; how one of the best of his "Sunday
stories" was dictated directly after having been taken to a hospital
with three ribs fractured by being hit by his commutation train--and how
much more. A young man with a brain in perfect practical working
condition. But even he was not free from the mysterious tricks of
creative writing. For we know that after a daily round sustained for a
number of years of high productivity, when he went into the war, which
inspired countless others to _begin_ writing, he suddenly ceased to
write, practically altogether.

Poets and trains being up, brings to my mind my friend the Reverend
Edward F. GareschÃ©, S. J., a source of amusement to many of his friends
because of his method of composition. He travels continually. Frequently
he will excuse himself from a group with whom he is talking, go to his
own seat, request the porter to bring him a card table, get out his
travelling typewriter, rattle off several poems, return to his party and
resume conversation at about where he had left off. Some of his poems
are very good; some (I'm sorry to have to say) are--not so good.

And so round we come again to the matter of writing in rooms. We know
how Booth Tarkington writes: in what he calls a "work spree," in a room
upstairs at home, a pile of freshly sharpened pencils ready to his
hand--and that, doubtless, he wouldn't be able to write anything in an
office if he were to be hanged for not doing it. (Probably never goes to
an office.) Meredith Nicholson, on the other hand, declares that the
only way it is possible for him to write is to go regularly at nine
o'clock every morning to an office he has downtown; where he tells
anyone who may ask over the telephone that he'll be there until five in
the afternoon.

There are persons who like to have others around them, moving about,
while they write. And people there are who find it necessary to lock
themselves up, and can have no one else in the room. Though in some
cases such persons would not mind the bang of a bass-drum just the other
side of the door. I know a man who had an office in lower Manhattan
where for a considerable period just outside his open window a steam
riveter was at work. Terrific it was, the way the noise of this machine
smashed the air into tiny particles like a shower of broken glass.
Callers who found this man contentedly writing would hold their ears and
look at him with their hair on end from amazement. A man of highly
nervous organism, too; one who would be very upset if his typewriter had
a pale ribbon, or be spoiled for the day if he couldn't find the right
pen--worn over just to his liking at the point. But, after the first day
or so, Mr. Soaping (name of the gentleman I'm telling you about) I know
didn't hear the riveter at all.

Then those exist, Royal Cortissoz is one, who, dictating all they do,
can have in the room while they work only their secretary. Frequently is
it the case, too, that none but the amanuensis to whom they have been
long accustomed will do. A stranger throws 'em completely off. A
novelist I know, the writer of a very good style, who becomes very much
fussed up, and is practically destroyed, when he suspects a secretary of
giving critical attention to the manner of his prose. An embarrassing
thing about most stenographers, I have found, is that they are greatly
grieved if you say "'em" for "them," or anything like that. Or else they
won't let you do such things at all, and edit everything pleasant back
into perfectly good copy-book English. Some of them won't even let you
split an infinitive.

Who was it, Voltaire, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, somebody, who could
write only when elaborately got up in his satins and ruffles? It is what
not long ago was called a bromidium to say that humorists are sad
people. I'd probably be thought humorous if I should call myself any
particular flier as a humorist, but this I know: wherever in my writing
I may have approached being amusing that generally was written when I
was considerably depressed. Forenoon is the best time for some to write;
late at night for others. "Ben Hur," I seem to recall, was penned
beneath a noble tree. At any rate, we frequently see pictures of
novelists, particularly in England, at work in their gardens. The most
familiar photographs, etchings, medallions and so on of Mark Twain and
of Robert Louis Stevenson at work are those of them writing in bed. Now
I can't (as some so take their breakfast) eat in bed; and I'm quite sure
I should never be able comfortably to write anything there. I do not
tell you how it is with me because I regard it as of deep interest to
you to hear how it is with me, but merely to aid me in assembling a
collection of facts concerning the freakishness of writing, and to
suggest to you how very different it may be with _you_.

And I couldn't write under a tree. One writer, perhaps, writes more
easily in the winter than in the summer, or it is the other way round.
The mind of one, it may be, is stimulated by the companionship of an
open fire, and that of another (for aught I know) by the companionship
of an ice-box. Personally, I think that it is well in writing for the
weather to be cool enough to have the windows down; and that night is
the best time, for the reason that your mind (or, at least, my mind) is
more gathered together within the circle of light at your desk.

Frequently, however (as you know), after sitting for hours with your
mind plumb stalled, it is not until shortly before your bed time that
that eccentric engine, your brain, gets buzzed up. Then, probably, you
can't call the thing off if you want to. I will tell you a story:

A man there is, of some renown as a writer, who started a new book early
last spring. For some considerable time he had been much discouraged
about his writing. Hadn't been able to make it go. Could only lift
heavily and painfully one stilted sentence after another. Used to take
up now and then one or another of his early books and look into it.
Marvelled how it was that he ever could have written such clever stuff.
Like Swift when late in life he re-read "Gulliver," so did this man
exclaim: "What a genius I had at that time!" He felt that the fire had
gone out; his inner life seemed to have completely died; he was a hollow
shell; could now neither receive nor impart anything worth half a
jews-harp. When, one day, he heard rosy, young Hugh Walpole say of
himself that of course what he had written was merely a beginning to
what he felt he might do, this man looked at rosy, young Hugh Walpole
with a deeply gloomy and very jealous eye.

But, lo! as I say, this man started this new book. It began as a series
of articles for which he was to be paid--that was _why_ it was begun at
all. Now see! With him it was as Professor George Edward Woodberry says
of Poe in his admirable "Life"--for a time his genius had "slept." With
the start of the new book he awoke. It began to run right out of the
ends of his fingers. Took (that book) hold of him completely. He
couldn't leave it. Go to bed, have to get up and go at it again. Try to
go out for a round of exercise. After a block or so from his quarters,
walk slower and slower. Miserable. Tortured. Turn back. Immediately
happy again. Soon be back at work. Anybody who entangled him with an
invitation anywhere enraged him beyond measure.

New book finished. Everything fine. Got another commission. Easy enough
job. Set to at it. Empty vessel again! In despair. He'd make all sorts
of excuses to himself to leave his place early in the morning to
postpone beginning work. He'd go anywhere, with anybody, to keep as long
as possible from facing that task again. Couldn't give any sensible
explanation of his prolonged delay to the publishers. Kept putting them
off again and again, with one cripple-legged excuse after another, in
the hope that he'd come round. Matter became a disgrace.

Still queerer cases than that I know. Fellow who shared an apartment
with me one time. When according to the accepted law of nature his mind
should have been in a very bad way, then always was he at his best.
After leading a regular, wholesome life for a period his mind would
become dull, stale and unprofitable. When, following a very different
sort of period, he should in all reason have awakened with a splitting
head, a swollen eye and a shaking hand, he would get up at about dawn
one morning in rattling fine spirits, his mind as clear as a bell, and
with an impassioned desire to work. Could, then, write like a streak.
But doesn't William James touch upon such a matter as this somewhere?

And Stevenson, how wrong he got the thing! What is it he tells us as to
the years of apprenticeship to writing:

     It is only after years of such gymnastic that one can sit down at
     last, legions of words swarming to his call, dozens of turns of
     phrase simultaneously bidding for his choice, and he himself
     knowing what he wants to do and (within the narrow limit of a man's
     ability) able to do it.

Only last night it was I was talking to Jesse Lynch Williams. He said
nothing of "legions of words swarming to his call," nary a mention of
"dozens of turns of phrase simultaneously bidding for his choice."
Instead, he asked if I found that writing came easier as time went on.
No, he said, it seemed to him that writing became harder and harder the
longer one wrote. That he had torn up everything he had done for a long
while.

Always the paradox! Again, there are men who write with astonishing
ease, or at least with astonishing rapidity, and write well. Not so long
ago I began a novel in collaboration with a writer known and admired
from coast to coast, a frequent contributor to _The Bookman_, and one of
the best. We were to do this thing turn and turn about, a chapter by me,
then a chapter by him, and so on. For something like ten days I toiled
over chapter one. I labored and I groaned. When it was finished I was
spent. I handed him the manuscript; he stuffed it into his overcoat
pocket and went whistling away. Returned within a few days and handed me
a wad of copy covering, I think, three chapters. Again I toiled in the
sweat of my brow. Gave him another chapter. When, after a couple of
weeks or something like that, he returned and I had read what he had
done I discovered that he had got people married that I hadn't known
were yet born. The collaboration busted up.

My excellent friend does not like me to tell this story, because he
thinks it represents me as the conscientious artist and him as the
shallow scribbler. Well, that was not so; his chapters were far better
than mine. Nevertheless, his name I shall not give; I'll merely say
that it has very much the sound of a name borne by one of the
Elizabethan dramatists.

Then there is that sort of human head-piece which can only write when it
absolutely has to. I allude to the magical instrument of coercion known
as a "copy date." I know people, dozens of them, who having a month and
a half ahead of them in which to do an article can't possibly get
started on it until it is almost too late for them to get it in on time
to go to press--when a mad frenzy seizes them, their indolence vanishes
like mist before the rising sun, their minds open like a flower, and all
is well.

And the "galley slaves," those poor devils who for years have lived
under the whip of copy day every day. How they dream of the "real"
things they might do, given time. If (they think) the Lord would only
subsidize them! Now and then the Devil takes one of them and does this
very thing. The happy man gets some sort of a sinecure. All he has to do
is to go write. And (in all probability) that's all there is to that
story. He is like those things Riley tells about who "swaller
theirselves." He gets nothing written.

What do you write with? And why do you write with whatever it is you
write with instead of with something else? Why did Mr. Howells (in all
the writing of his which I have seen) use a script-letter typewriter
instead of a Roman-letter machine? Why does Mr. Le Gallienne do so much
of his copy (if not all of it) by hand? Why is it that Mr. Huneker could
never either dictate or learn to run a typewriter? How is it possible
for those Englishmen--Swinnerton and Bennett, for instance--to put forth
in a few months whole novels in the monkish hand of an illuminated
missal? (I have seen the original manuscript of "The Old Wives' Tale,"
every page like a copper-plate engraving, and hardly a correction
throughout.) And why is that it seems to me most natural to write some
things with a pen, others with a pencil, most things on a typewriter,
and yet again mix the use of all three implements in one composition? I
cannot tell you.

Some authors, if they are going to write about a slum, have to go and
live in a slum while they are writing about a slum. Other authors, if
they are going to write about life in an Ohio town, go to Italy to write
about life in an Ohio town. In his excellent book "On the Trail of
Stevenson" Clayton Hamilton says:

     Throughout his lifelong wanderings, Stevenson rarely or never
     attempted to describe a place so long as he was in it. For his
     selection of descriptive detail he relied always on the
     subconscious artistry of memory. He trusted his own mind to forget
     the non-essential; and he seized upon whatever he remembered as, by
     that token, the most essential features of a scene--the features,
     therefore, that cried out to be selected as the focal points of the
     picture to be suggested to the mind's eye of his readers.

The author of the thirteen volumes known as "The Chronicles of
Barsetshire," a detailed picture of the English clergy of his time, had
never associated with bishops, deans, and arch-deacons; he built them up
(to use his own expression) out of his "moral consciousness."

But round to rooms again. Often has it been told how Anthony Trollope
worked. How he accomplished so much--thirty-odd novels besides as many
tales--by a method he recommended to all who wish to pursue successfully
the literary career. In the drawing room of the AthenÃ¦um Club, in a
railway carriage, or on the ocean, wherever he might be he seated
himself for three hours as a limit, with his watch before him; and
regularly as it marked the quarter hour he turned off two hundred and
fifty words, undisturbed by any distraction about him. We know that the
unlettered man of genius, John Bunyan, wrote his immortal allegory "The
Pilgrim's Progress" in Bedford jail. And there is being advertised now a
book recently written in an American prison. And much writing has been
done in garrets. Then here's our old friend George Moore. Again and
again he has told of exactly the places it was necessary for him to live
in while he wrote certain books. I open at random "Ave"; and I find
this:

     I descended the hillside towards the loveliest prospect that ever
     greeted mortal eyes.... And I walked thinking if there were one
     among my friends who would restore Mount Venus sufficiently for the
     summer months, long enough for me to write my book.

Now, to be quite frank with you, I didn't intend to write this paper at
all. You may remember that when I set out I was merely in disagreement
with Mr. Lucas concerning the matter of writing in a hotel room. One
thing (as it will) led to another; and the upshot has been all this
pother. However, there are, I hope, no bones broken--and that's saying a
good deal for any kind of a discussion in these unsettled times.

What I am coming to is (the fashionable thing to come to nowadays) the
psychic. A fellow I know was much puzzled. He recently got back to 16
Gramercy Park from a trip around the world. I saw him there having some
toast and a pot of tea. He told me these interesting circumstances. He
would be at a superbly appointed hotel in some city. Beautiful suite of
rooms. Commodious bath-room with lovely bay-window. Everything to make
for perfect mental and physical well-being. Impotent to write there.
Later runs into some terrible dump of a lodging house. Horrible din of
low noises all about. One dirty window looks out on scene of squalor. So
cold at night has to put chair on bed and sit there to be nearer gas
jet. Gets on wonderfully with writing. Strikes another place, handsomest
of all; writes pretty well. Comes to most fearful place yet; can't write
at all.

Couldn't make head nor tail of the matter, this fellow. Discussed the
thing with many people. Finally found young woman who gave convincing
explanation. It's like this: Undoubtedly you are, in any room, affected
by something of the spirit which lingers there of former occupants.
Maybe they were persons, whatever their station in life, sympathetic to
your spirit--maybe not.




CHAPTER X

TAKING THE AIR IN SAN FRANCISCO


A few days ago, in the warm and brilliant winter sunlight there, I was
strolling along the Embarcadero. Now all my life I have been very fond
of roving the streets....

And that confession reminds me:

I one time heard a minister (a clergyman of considerable force of
eloquence) preach a sermon against streets. His idea seemed to be that
streets were not good for one--that they were very bad places. He
admonished mothers to keep their children "off the streets." He regarded
it as very reprehensible in a wife for her to "gad the streets." The
footpad (he said) plied the street at night, while the righteous were at
home in bed. What so sad as "a child of the streets"? If we wished to
describe a worthless canine we called it a "street dog." The outcast has
his home in the streets. The drunkard makes his bed in the street. It
was painful (I gathered) for a civilized being to hear the "language of
the street." And so on.

But I very much fear that the eloquence of this gentleman was greater
than his Christianity. If we are to love our neighbors as we do
ourselves, we will find him in greatest variety in the streets. If we
are to give away our cloak, the beneficiary, I should think, would be a
citizen much accustomed to the streets. And, as far as I can make out,
there is more rejoicing in heaven over the arrival of a sister who has
"walked the streets" than attends the reception of a nun.

Certainly I admit that roaming the streets (like everything else) can
doubtless be overdone. Nevertheless, to most people, people of ordinary
ways of life (like myself), I highly recommend the practice, as a most
healthful exercise, as a pleasant course of profitable education, as a
source of endless amusement, and as a Christian virtue. The trouble, I
think, with most of us is not that we see too much of the streets but
that we do not see as well as we might the streets we happen to be on.
We do not read as we run.

So I would write an article In Praise of Streets.

As I was saying (when that minister switched me off), I was strolling
along the Embarcadero. Among all the different sorts of streets there
are none I think more beguiling than those which lie along the water
front of a town or a city. The water-front streets of all seaport
cities, of course, partake very much of the same character. Particularly
in the picturesque aspect of the shop windows.

Here along the rim of San Francisco Bay you pass the sparkling pier
buildings (now and then of Spanish mission architecture) of the Toyo
Kisen Kaisha Oriental S. S. Co., of the American Hawaiian S. S. Co., the
Kosmos Line, and the Pacific-Alaska Navigation Co., among others. While
on New York's West Street you see the structures of the White Star Line,
the Cunard Line, the Red Star Line, erected in masonry of a sort of
mammoth and glorified garage architecture, funnels and masts peeping
over the top; and further down the frame sheds of the Morgan Line, the
Clyde Steam Ship Company, Savannah Line, Lackawanna Rail Road, Hoboken
Ferry, and so on. But the tastes of the sailor man as a shopper appear
to be very much the same whether he is along the London docks, on West
Street, by Boston piers or here on the Embarcadero. In this the West
and the East do meet.

The Ã¦sthetic taste of the water front inclines, very decidedly, to the
ornate. As (presumably) a present to a lady and a decoration for the
home the favorite object seems to be a heavy china plate. A romantic
landscape, or a moonlight scene, or perhaps a still life study of portly
roses is "hand painted" in very thick pigment on its face. Its rim is
plaited in effect, like the edge of a fancy pie, and through numerous
openings in this rim is run a heavy ribbon by which to hang it on the
wall.

Next in prominence in the window displays of water-front bazaars is the
set of bleary-colored glass ware (upper edges bound in gold) which I
take to be designed for the purpose of serving punch, or perhaps
lemonade--a large bowl of warty surface, with a number of cups to match
hanging from hooks at its brim.

The water front obviously is strong for the amenities, the arts and the
refinements of life. Bottles of perfume (with huge bows of ribbon at
their necks) are in great abundance in its shop windows; as also are
packets of boudoir soap (Dawn Lilac seems to be the favorite), toilet
powders, silk initial handkerchiefs, opera glasses, ladies' garters of
very fluffy design, feminine combs ornamented with birds in gilt,
exceedingly high stand-up collars for gentlemen, banjos, guitars,
mandolins, accordions (of a great variety of sizes), harmonicas, playing
cards, dice and poker chips.

As for the rest of the display, it is a multifarious collection: rubber
hip-boots, hair clippers, money belts, brogans, bandana handkerchiefs,
binoculars, tobacco pouches, spools of thread, pitch-black plug tobacco,
hand searchlights, heavy underwear, woolen sox, razor strops, tin
watches, shaving brushes, elaborately carved pipes, trays of heavy
rings, and here and there some quaint curiosity, such as a little model
of a sailing ship in a bottle which it could not have entered through
the mouth, or some such oddity as that.

One old friend of mine on West Street I missed on the Embarcadero. And
that is (very battered and worn are the specimens of him which remain as
the last of his noble race) the cigar-store wooden Indian.

And (I much regret) neither on the Embarcadero nor on any other water
front in America do we have the rich costume ball effects that you find
about the docks of London. There (as you remember) about the East India
and the West India docks may be observed tall, dark visaged figures in
loosely flowing robes and brilliant turbans solemnly pushing along high
laden trucks and, high above on the decks of ships, hauling away at
ropes.

But on the shore side of the San Francisco water front, my fancy was
much taken by the salt sea savor of the signs of the houses of
entertainment--signs reminiscent of the jovial days of briny romance,
echoed in the chantey in "Treasure Island," which has as its refrain:

    Yo, ho, ho, and a bottle of rum.

I passed, among others, the Marine CafÃ©, the Navy CafÃ©, the Admiral
CafÃ©, the Harbor Bar, and the Ferry CafÃ©.

I did not turn up Market Street, but went on around the nose of the
peninsula, which is the foundation of San Francisco. I passed a
three-masted ship, the _Lizzie Vance_, lying by her wharf, with men
aloft in her rigging. Then I clambered up endless relays of rickety
wooden stairs mounting Telegraph Hill. On either side of the ladder-like
steps, ramshackle cabins bedecked with lines of fluttering "wash." Like
the celebrated editor of _Puck_, H. C. Bunner, I might say that in my
travels I've missed many a cathedral but I never missed a slum.

I went along through the Latin Quarter, slid down the steep slope of
Kearny Street, and found myself wandering into that quaint little park,
Portsmouth Square, where R. L. S. in his most stressful days lounged in
the sun and listened to the tales of the vagabonds of the Seven Seas.
Somewhat bigger than tiny Gramercy Park, hardly as large as little
Madison Square, this park. In the center of the bit of rolling lawn,
before a towering screen of rustling trees, the graceful little stone
ship, buoyant on its curling stone wave, rides atop its tall stone
pedestal graved "To Remember Robert Louis Stevenson," and on the face of
which is cut that most fragrant of creeds, which (as everyone knows)
begins: "To be honest, to be kind, to earn a little and to spend a
little less, to make upon the whole a family happier for his presence"
...

Behind the bench on which I rested was the establishment, so proclaimed
the legend printed on its front, of Wing Sun, Funeral Director. For, as
you know, Portsmouth Square is embraced on one side by prosperous
Chinatown, and on the other by the Italian quarter of San Francisco. And
the races, Latin and Oriental, mingle in the little park to take the
air.

What here is still more colorful and picturesque, frequently there is a
striking and amusing mixture of races in the costume of an individual
figure. A Manchu lady, it may be, of waxen, enigmatic features, draped
in flowing black silken trousers, hobbles along on high-heeled,
pearl-colored American shoes. And there a slim reed of an Oriental
maiden, with a complexion like a California orange, whisks by in the
smartest of tailored suits--without a hat, her gleaming black hair done
in Chinese fashion, long ornamented rods thrust through it, a vivid
pendant of bright blossoms at one side of the head.

Sitting there, I thought of the nature of public parks and what pleasant
places they are.

Splendid thing, elaborate park "systems," whereby you may go for miles
through a grimy city, and move among groves and meadows and bosky dells,
with inspiriting glimpses of mirror-like ponds and flashing streams all
the way. And of course I enjoy the great parks of a great city.

But more appealing to me than the gorgeous spectacle of Hyde Park, or
Van Cortlandt, or Fairmont, or Jackson, or Forest Park are the little
places tucked here and there in the seething caldron of the town. These
are a lovely department of the streets--they are the little parlors of
the streets. Here calls are made, and infants sun themselves--they have,
these parklets, their social and their domestic life, under the
democratic heavens.

Now soon is a time to watch with joy these plots of open space in the
city's rushing life. Spring is more winsome on Boston Common and at
Union Square than in the country. A tuft of green shoots seen against
canyon walls of steel and stone--one must be in the city to savor the
tenderness of spring.

And when summer comes and (in our eastern climate) all the town swelters
under a blanket of gritty dust and heavy heat, then one comes upon one
of these small areas of greenery with the refreshment of spirit with
which at the meal hour one greets the appearance of a nice, cool, green
salad.

I arose from my seat in Portsmouth Square and wandered off for the rest
of the day through the Streets.




CHAPTER XI

BIDDING MR. CHESTERTON GOOD-BYE


The note, which came altogether as a surprise, read: "My husband
suggests that if you have nothing better to do perhaps you would look in
upon us on Wednesday evening at about eight-thirty." Mrs. Chesterton
further said, in giving the address, that they had a little apartment
lent to them for the last week of their stay here. She had asked Mr.
Woollcott to come, too, and Gerald Stanley Lee.... "We can only promise
you smokes and talk."

I wondered, as I hurried for the 'bus, whether I'd have time to get my
shoes polished. It was precisely the hour appointed when I reached what
I took to be the door. The hall-man declared that he had "gone out." I
insisted that the hall-man telephone up. "No answer," he said, after a
bit, and hung up. Now what do you think of that! Well, I'd take a walk
and return a little later.

As I was rounding the corner coming back I saw an agile, rotund figure,
with a gleam of white shirt-front in the half darkness, mounting the
dusky steps instead of descending into the lighted areaway. Looked kinda
like Mr. Woollcott. If so, the gentleman was going wrong, so I called to
him.

"He has not come back," the hall-man asserted, but assented to our
demands to ring up again. No response. "It was about an hour ago he went
out," he replied to our question. Standing there, Mr. Woollcott and I
contrived several theories. One was that Mr. Chesterton had intended to
return by now but had lost track of the time. Another was that possibly
Mrs. Chesterton had invited us on her own hook and had overlooked
notifying Mr. Chesterton of the matter. "Has a third gentleman been
here?" we asked, meaning Mr. Lee. No. We went for a stroll.

It was nine o'clock. And Mr. Woollcott's manner indicated that he was
inclined to take some sort of revenge on the hall-man. Was he, the
hall-man, certain that he had everything straight? "Sure," he nodded;
"it's Mr. Cushman's apartment." Mr. Cushman's apartment! Had we, then,
been blundering in the wrong place all this time! "Mr. Chesterton!"
roared Mr. Woollcott. Yes, yes; he understood that ... the gentleman had
come in yesterday. That was right according to the note I had had from
Mrs. Chesterton; so we demanded that the man make another effort at the
telephone. Ah!... he heard something. "It's all right," he mumbled;
"they are there."

As we got out of the car Mr. Chesterton was cramming the tiny hall. He
was in an attitude which I took to be that of a bow, but I later
discovered, as he shuffled back and forth about the apartment, that he
walks that way all the time now when in the privacy of his own quarters.
Mrs. Chesterton greeted us as we entered the room, Mr. Chesterton
trailing in behind us and continuing a welcoming murmur which had
somewhat the sound of a playful brook. Mrs. Chesterton ensconced herself
behind a tea table. Mr. Chesterton lumbered about with cigars. He
disclaimed the great easy chair by the electric table lamp in which it
was unmistakable that he had been sitting, but was prevailed upon to
return to it.

In apology for the lateness of our arrival we mentioned our difficulties
in discovering that he was in. Mr. Chesterton seemed bewildered by the
circumstance. He shook his head and (evidently referring to the
hall-man) said he was not able to understand "that foreigner" at all.
"That foreigner?" we smiled at the Englishman. I think it most likely
that the explanation of his not having heard our earlier rings was that
he was not familiar with the system of bells in the apartment. They had
not been out, he declared; oh, yes! they had been out, too, a good while
ago, to get something to eat. "We are camping here," he said, "in a
rather Bohemian fashion." Didn't they enjoy that as a change from life
in fashionable hotels? Oh, yes! Very much.

They wondered if Mr. Lee were not coming. Yes; he had assured me that he
was, when I had seen him that afternoon at the club. In fact, we had
discussed what we would wear, and had agreed on dinner jackets. Mr.
Chesterton was wearing a braid-bound cutaway coat of felt-like material
(very much wrinkled in the skirt) and dark striped trousers of stiffish
quality, but not recently pressed. His bat-wing collar had a sharp
crease extending outward at one side as though it were broken. Though it
was a very warm night for early spring--a hot night, indeed--he wore
uncommonly heavy woolen sox, which were very much "coming down" about
his ankles. His comically small English eye-glasses, with a straight rod
joining them across the top, were perpetually coming off his nose. On
one finger he wore a rather large ring. I noticed that for so large a
man his hands were somewhat small, and were delicately made. At one side
of him were three ashtrays (one of them a huge brass bowl well filled
with tobacco ash) and at the other side of him one tray.

Well, what sort of a time had he been having? How far west had he got?
He had been as far as (I think) Omaha. "Halfway across," he said. He had
been much mystified by a curious character he had run into there: a
strange being whose waistcoat and coat front were covered by symbolic
emblems, crescents, full moons and stars. This person had accosted him
in the street saying, "And so you are a lecturer." The man had then
informed him that he also was a lecturer. He lectured, he said, on
astronomy. "Indeed, in my country," Mr. Chesterton had said, "it is not
the custom for astronomers to display on their person devices symbolic
of the science in which they are engaged." Next, the man had opened his
coat and exhibited the badge of a sheriff, or some sort of officer of
the peace. Mr. Chesterton had been astounded to discover the functions
of a man of science, a lecturer and a policeman united in one and the
same person. It was quite evident that this (as I assume he was)
harmless lunatic had made a most decided impression upon Mr.
Chesterton's mind; he took the eccentric individual with much
seriousness, apparently as some kind of a type; indeed, I feared that we
would never get him switched off from talking about him; and I have no
doubt that, in the course of time, this ridiculous astronomer will
appear as a bizarre character in some fantastic tale, a personage
perhaps related to Father Brown, or something like that.

Mr. Chesterton observed that he had enjoyed the opportunity of seeing
various grades of American life, that he had been in the homes of very
humble people as well as in houses of persons of wealth and social and
intellectual position. In a former article I noted how Mr. Chesterton
had been greatly startled to find (what he then called) "wooden houses"
in this country, and such multitudes of them. He now returned to this
phenomenon. What was his one outstanding impression of the United
States? Well, he remarked that he had said it before, but he continued
to be chiefly struck by the vast number of "frame houses" here.

Mr. Lee arrived. A gentleman who looks very much as though you were
looking at his reflection in one of those trick mirrors (such as they
have at Coney Island) which humorously attenuate and elongate the
figures before them. Or, again, perhaps more justly still, a gentleman
who looks as though Daumier had drawn him as an illustration for "Don
Quixote." In his evening clothes (to put it still another way), a
gentleman who looks much like a very lengthened shadow dancing on a
wall. Mr. Whistler would have made something very striking indeed out of
Mr. Lee in a dinner coat, something beautifully strange. I do not know
that I have ever seen anything finer, in its own exceedingly peculiar
way, than Mr. Lee, thus attired, with a cup of tea in his hand.

"Do you like wine?" Mr. Woollcott asked Mr. Chesterton, and told him of
a restaurant nearby where this could be obtained. Our prohibition, Mr.
Chesterton said, did not bother him so much as might be thought, as for
reasons having to do with his health he was (as you or I would say)
"off the stuff" at present.

One of us, Mr. Woollcott I think, commented upon the sweep of Mr.
Chesterton's fame in the United States. The opinion was advanced that
the evening of the day he landed his arrival was known in every literate
home in New York. Mr. Chesterton was inclined to think that his
"notoriety" in large measure came from his "appearance," his
"avoirdupois." Knowledge of him had spread through the notion that he
was a "popular curiosity." It was contended that his writing had been
well-known over here ten years before his pictures became familiar to
us. (Though, of course, I myself do think that the pictorial quality of
his corporeal being has been very effective publicity for him.)

Then there was another thing which Mr. Chesterton thought might to a
considerable degree account for his American celebrity. That was this
"tag" of "paradox." People loved "easy handles" like that, and they went
a long way. Somehow or other we let this point pass, or it got lost in
the shuffle, and the discussion turned to the question of whether there
was an American writer living whose arrival in England would command
anything like the general attention occasioned by Mr. Chesterton's
entrance into the United States. We could not think of anyone.

Mark Twain, of course; yes. O. Henry, doubtless, too. And, indeed, in
the matter of years O. Henry might very well be living now. Mr.
Chesterton quite agreed as to the English welcome of Mark Twain or of O.
Henry. Tom Sawyer and Huck, he said musingly, certainly were
"universal." Then, ponderingly, he observed that English and American
literature seemed to be getting farther and farther apart, or more and
more distinct each from the other. That is, he remembered that when he
was a boy his father and his uncles simply spoke of a new book having
come out whether it had been written in England or in the United States.
As in the case of the "Autocrat of the Breakfast Table": when it
appeared it was enjoyed and talked about by everybody in England; but
not spoken of there as a new American book: it was a new book, that's
all. Now, however, with Englishmen impressed by the "Spoon River
Anthology," "and rightly so," or by "Main Street," "it would not be that
way."

He had much liking for O. Henry. But he had begun by not liking him. He
had been puzzled by the "queer commercial deals" on which so many of the
stories turned--"buying towns, selling rivers." He had, even now, to
re-read much of the slang to get the meaning. And so we talked awhile of
slang.

"You have an expression here," said Mr. Chesterton, shaking his head as
though that were something very remarkable indeed, "_a bad actor_" Much
mirth from Woollcott, Lee and Holliday. "Now in England," Mr. Chesterton
continued, "we mean by that one who has mistaken his vocation as to the
stage. But I discovered that here it has nothing to do with the
theatrical profession." Then, it developed, some reporter in the West
had referred to him as "a regular guy." At first Mr. Chesterton had been
for going after the fellow with a stick.... Certainly a topsy-turvy
land, the United States, where you can't tell opprobrium from flattering
compliment.

Then one of us told Mr. Chesterton a story of a prize line of American
slang. He (the teller of the story) had got a letter in which a friend
of his had been spoken of in a highly eulogistic fashion. Thinking this
opinion of him would please his friend this man showed the letter to
him. The gentleman so much praised in it read the letter and remarked:
"Well, whenever I get the hand I always see the red light." Mr.
Chesterton looked dazed. "You'll have to translate that to me," he said.
It was explained to him that the meaning of this was that whenever this
person heard applause of himself he always scented danger. "Oh, oh! I
see!" crowed Mr. Chesterton, "the hand, the hand," and he began clapping
his hands in illustration of the figure with much glee.

"Glee," yes. And "crowed," also. They are the words, some of the words,
to describe Mr. Chesterton's sounds. His utterance was rapid, melodious.
The modulations of his softly flowing voice had curiously somewhat the
effect of a very cheerful music-box. His easy and very natural command
of a great multitude of words was striking. And yet there was something
decidedly boyish about the effect of his talk. I think the cause of this
was, for one thing, the rather gurgling enjoyment with which he spoke,
and for another thing, in his impulsive concern for the point of his
idea he frequently did not trouble to begin nor end sentences. He just
let 'er go. But the fundamental source of this boyishness of spirit I
think was this: I do not believe I have ever seen a man who had borne
the brunt of life for some forty-five years and still retained such
complete, abounding, unaffected and infectious good humor as Mr.
Chesterton.

"As I believe I have said somewhere before," Mr. Chesterton was saying,
"it seems to me that the best known character in literature is Sherlock
Holmes." Mr. Woollcott was inclined to consider Svengali. Dear me!
Svengali may have been in the running at one time, but it strikes me
that today he has pretty much gone by the board, somewhat to mix the
figure.

As to detective stories: "They are essentially domestic," declares Mr.
Chesterton. "Intimate, all in the household, or ought to be. The
children's nurse should murder the Bishop. These things where the
Foreign Office becomes involved and" (chuckling) "Indian rajahs and
military forces come in are never right. They are too big. The detective
story is a fireside story."

Had Mr. Chesterton been much to the theatre while here? No; the only
thing he had seen was "The Bat." Something like anguish on the face of
the dramatic critic of the New York _Times_. Why, he, Mr. Chesterton,
had liked "The Bat," a good deal. Speaking of plays, the American
presentation of "Magic" came into the conversation. It was remarked that
the extremely mystical character of the setting rather crushed the
mysticism of the play itself. The idea was advanced that a very simple,
matter-of-fact, even bleak setting, would have been the thing to act as
an effective foil to this play. Mr. Chesterton seemed to be not the
slightest interested in stage-settings. And he knew next to nothing at
all about the career of "Magic." He wasn't even sure whether or not he
held any proprietary rights in the play. There was, he said as though
fumbling around in his mind, something involved about the matter. Friend
of his wanted a play. Necessary to finish it in a hurry. He didn't
really know, answering a question to this purpose, whether or not he
received any royalties from it.

Mrs. Chesterton again handed about some fudge. The collection of
ash-trays and bowls surrounding Mr. Chesterton had become jovially
freighted with tobacco ash and cigar ends. He smoked his cigars in an
economical fashion, down as far as they could comfortably be held.

There was one thing (the talk had turned to his lecturing) Mr.
Chesterton "wished you wouldn't do in this country, or that we didn't do
in England, either." That was for the gentleman who "introduced" a
lecturer to refer to his "message." In his own case, for instance, how
ridiculously was this term misapplied. The word "message" conveyed
something "quite the opposite of personality." Or, that is, before its
popular corruption it had meant something very different. It meant that
something was carried. One with a message was a messenger, a vessel, an
envelope. It was hard to think of a figure who could rightly be said to
have a message. The Old Testament prophets, Mohammed, perhaps. Whitman,
now certainly you couldn't say that Whitman had a message.

A ring; and Mr. Cushman came in. Youthfully cropped grey hair. A
gentleman who looked like a habitual first-nighter.

Yes, Mr. Chesterton was telling us, it was a curious thing. He had
always heard that Americans worshipped machines. A machine everywhere
here, and a machine brought to an amazing state of mechanical
perfection, was the elevator, as we called it. When he had first got
into an American elevator he had been arrested by the fact that the men
entering it took off their hats and stood silently with bared heads as
it ascended. It is so, he had said to himself, they are at worship, at
prayer, this is some religious rite, mystic ceremony, the elevator is
their temple.

Had he been in our subway? was asked. No; he had been down in a station
one time, but he had not ridden on one of the trains. I wish now that I
had thought to cut into the rapid battledore and shuttlecock of the
conversation to learn why he had not been. Was he scared of 'em?

What were the things which Mr. Chesterton particularly liked in the
United States? Well, for one thing, he very much liked the "elevated."
He thought it was grand up in the air that way.

And what had be especially _disliked_? Mr. Lee apparently had knowledge
of a memorandum book kept by Mrs. Chesterton, known to their ultimate
little circle as her "Book of Likes and Dislikes." She was, with some
difficulty, prevailed upon to read from this--which she did very
guardedly, clutching the book very firmly before her. Among the things
put down in it as not liked were ice cream, ice water, "American boots"
(by which was meant women's high-heeled shoes), and interviewers,
reporters and camera men. Things especially liked included parlor-car
seats. Mr. Chesterton: "I don't dislike it, now. I've got the evil habit
of ice water."

"Lift," it was generally agreed, was a happier word than "elevator."
Mrs. Chesterton thought that the scientific, technical, correct, or
whatever you call them, words for things always took all the feeling of
life out of them. "Aviator," for example, had no color at all. But how
fine in the spirit of the thing was the popular term "flying-man," or
"fly-man"!

The conversation had got momentarily divided into groups. Mr. Chesterton
was heard saying to Mr. Woollcott, "The time I mean was when Yeats was
young--when mysticism was jazz."

Just how he got started in on them I do not recall. He began with
Belloc's most entertaining and highly vivacious ballad which has the
refrain, "And Mrs. James will entertain the king"; a kind of a piece
among friends, which unfortunately is not in any book. He recited with a
kind of joyous unction, nodding his head forward and back from side to
side, thus keeping time to the music of the verse, punctuating the close
of each stanza with bubble of chuckles. On and on and on and on he went
through goodness knows how many bits of rollicking literary fooling.

It was half past eleven. I saw Mr. Chesterton, when someone else was
speaking, yawn slightly now and then. The four callers arose to go. Some
one of us asked Mr. Chesterton if he expected to be back in America
soon. Through a wreath of smiles he replied that he was not getting a
return ticket on the boat.

The two of them were framed in their doorway as we got into the
"foreigner's" car. Mrs. Chesterton called to us that she hoped to see us
all in England, "singly or together." As the car dropped from their
floor both were beaming a merry, friendly farewell.

Suddenly it struck me that they were very like a pair of children--they
were so happy, so natural, so innocent of guile, and obviously so fond
of one another.




CHAPTER XII

NO SYSTEM AT ALL TO THE HUMAN SYSTEM


I think I'll tell you about myself. Maybe it's the same way with you.
Anyhow, it's a mighty queer thing. And we ought to try to get some light
on the matter--why there is, apparently, no reason or logic at all about
our systems.

You see, I go along a pretty fair amount of the time feeling all right;
nothing wrong with my system; nothing, at any rate, that I can notice.
Everybody says: "How well you're looking! Great color, you've got." And
so on.

Then, maybe, I see in the paper that there is an epidemic scheduled to
devastate the city pretty soon. This news lays hold of me right off. The
paper goes on to say that it behooves all citizens to take thought to
fortify their systems against the ravages of this terrible disease which
is rapidly approaching.

Or I read, say, that Thrift Week was such an enormous success (for
everybody else) that a campaign is under way to inaugurate a Health
Week, which (I read) will greatly reduce the mortality in the community.
The way to reduce my own mortality (I read with considerable attention)
is for me to Stop, Look and Listen in the matter of my health. And To Do
It Now! I don't like those profane words, like mortality. They disturb
me. And occasionally get me into no end of trouble--as you'll see.

Or, perhaps, I notice around in cars and places an unusual number of
advertisements instructing you what firm to consult in order to
"safeguard the interests of your heirs." A died (one of these cards may
say) and left his estate to B, his widow, naming C as executor. C died
suddenly shortly afterward. B (the widow) met E, with oil lands in
Hawaii--and so on. The advertisement winds up: Are you A?

Not yet; I'm not! But I'd better watch out. I know this is a good
advertisement because it gets into my mind the way it does.

Or, again, perhaps there are just a number of little things that I come
across. A gentleman one day tells me at luncheon, we'll say, that he
can't drink tea because it gives him uric acid so bad. Good gracious!
And I (maybe) subject to uric acid!

An octogenarian (we'll suppose) is interviewed. He attributes his
longevity to abstemiousness in the use of inexpensive cigarettes. (I at
once put mine out.)

A chemist (very likely) gets a lot of publicity by declaring that you
are to Look Before You Leap in the matter of drinking water. (And but
the night before I drank from the spout in the kitchen!) And so on.
Well, things such as these set one to thinking.

I say to myself when I get that way (to thinking, I mean) a stitch in
time saves nine; there's no loss so bad as the loss of your health,
because if you have that you can obtain aught else; a word to the wise
is sufficient; make hay while the sun shines; little drops of water wear
away the stone; take heed for the morrow while it is yet May; be not
like unto the foolish virgin who spilt the beans. And many other things
of this kind, which (doubtless in wise measure) are both good and true.

Well, in short, I determine to "build up," to get myself in thoroughly
"good shape."

I swear off smoking. I put away the home brew. I do not eat fresh
bread. I procure myself overshoes against the rain. I rise with the
lark. I (religiously eating an apple first) go to bed betimes. I walk so
many miles a day--also skip a rope. I shun all delicacies of the table.
I take those horrid extra cold baths, for the circulation. I do "deep
breathing." I "relax" for twelve minutes each day. I shun the
death-dealing demon "worry." I "fix my mind on cheerful thoughts." I
"take up a hobby," philately, or something like that. I eat the skins of
potatoes. I watch the thermometer at the office, and monkey continually
with the steam radiator. Everything like that.

When you undertake a thing (even if it's only shelling peas) be thorough
in it, that's my motto. I don't, indeed, in this regimen get much work
done, but it's better to be slow and sure.

Well, what happens?

When I set out to build up this is what happens to me: First thing,
maybe, I get pimples. No; no maybe about it. I sure get pimples. Then,
very likely, I get a carbuncle. (I have just asked my assistant how you
spell that word. She inquires if I mean the gem, or--or the other. I
have told her I mean the other.)

Next, very probably, I "contract" (as they say) a cough. This cough
"develops" into a cold.... You have (I trust) had that sort of cold
which hangs on for months. Nothing recommended is of any help to you.
You become resigned (more or less) to the idea--just as a man who has
lost a leg (or his mind) must resolve to do the best he can with the
rest of his life without his leg (or his mind), so must you adapt
yourself to the stern condition imposed by Fate of always having a cold.
That's the kind of a cold I mean that I get. (Only worse!)

My cold branches out into several little side lines, such as acute
neuralgia and inflammatory rheumatism. Stiff joints impede my agility in
getting down the hill to my morning train to the city. I slip on the ice
and break my glasses.

Not having my glasses causes me at the office to greet Mr. Sloover as
Mr. Rundle, and this sort of error breathes a chill upon the nice
nuances of business.

Or in my personal correspondence (if I were that kind of a person) I
might put my letter for Penelope into the envelope for Pauline. This,
when I had discovered the calamity, would doubtless perturb my thoughts.
My thoughts being perturbed, I might walk out of the restaurant without
my change of three dollars and eighty cents. Thoroughly upset by now, I
walk under a ladder. Realizing that I have done this, my nervousness is
the occasion of my dropping my watch. Enough! I recognize that there is
no use in my going back to the office that afternoon. I telephone in
that I have gone home to bed with my cold.

On coming out of the cigar store where the telephone booth is, I see
Christopher Morley, Don Marquis and Franklin P. Adams walking down the
street arm in arm. (I can see very little without my glasses, but well
enough to recognize such a spectacle as that.) Something, I say, must be
on. And I cheer up considerably. Some cheering up certainly is just what
I need. I overhaul the company. And I ask it (the company) where it is
bound. It says: "For 'Mecca.' Come along." Don hands me a pocket flask
(largely empty), Chris presents me with a large green cigar, and Frank
gives me a match. It is agreed that we roll a little pool for a few
hours while waiting for the cab.

Well, you see, I've been led to abandon the idea of building up my
health--but I don't care, one may as well die happy.

I have a great time at that show. (My cold is immensely better.) I fix
on one eye-glass so as to see something desirable. And I cut up a lot.

But--when we turn to leave I discover the president of my company going
out just ahead of me. Well, I suppose I'll have to take what is coming
to me tomorrow.

That one good meal, anyhow (after the pool), has strengthened my spirit
immensely. I plan to have a regular, genuine breakfast in the morning.
The kind I used to enjoy before I started in to get myself in fine
shape. A breakfast of sliced pineapple, eggs, steak, fried potatoes,
cottage-cheese, hot rolls, and two pots of good strong coffee. A pipe
afterward.

When I get out to the house I find that my uncle (from whom I had been
estranged for years) has died, and left me his fine, ninety carat, forty
jewel, repeater watch.

I wake up bursting with joyous life. The girl tells me that those
especially handsome glasses I lost last New Year's Eve have been found.
Down at the station the station-master comes out to greet me. He says
so many people have slipped on our hill that next week the railroad is
going to install a free coach service. I see by the morning paper that
the horse I took a twelve to one shot on in the Buenos Aires derby came
out the length of the stretch to the good. On the train into town I
smoke a couple of packages of cigarettes--as I become a bit bothered
about the situation at the office.

A girder, or something, had fallen across the track. The train is held
up. For a couple of hours it stands there. I become more than decidedly
nervous. Now this is awful bad doings. Everything had been coming so
right again. It seems as if there is no reward in this world for
anything. Here for a whole month or so I had been subjecting myself to
the most rigorous and unpleasant kind of discipline solely in order to
make myself more efficient in my work, and so more valuable to the
house. Nothing else. Then by an accident I am kept away from the office
one afternoon, and this has to go and happen just to keep me away
probably the whole of the forenoon. Everything will, of course, be
misunderstood and misinterpreted. Instead of getting just credit for
what I've done, I'll probably get bounced. If anyone wants to have the
moral of this story pointed out to him: it is that there is not much use
in trying, you can see that.

When I do get to the office my secretary is in quite a flurry. She tells
me that Mr. Equity, the president, has been inquiring for me. In
fact--she hesitates--wants me to step in to see him as soon as I arrive.

So, there you are!

Mr. Equity (a most unusual thing in any circumstances) shakes my hand
with great cordiality. He smiles, not benignantly but rather
deferentially. Says that he has recognized for some little time that I
have not had a salary commensurate with my services. Times, however, are
not of the best. Would I be willing to continue with the firm at--a
pause--well, double my present salary? Everything, he adds, would be
made as pleasant for me as possible.

His secretary whispers to me in an outer office: "He has been so
flustered. He was scared you weren't ever coming back."

I discussed this matter of the strange workings of the human system with
a friend of mine outside the office. "Ah!" he said, "you didn't
persevere long enough in looking after yourself. If you had kept it up
for a year instead of only a month, you'd be a well man today. And," he
added seriously, "a successful man, too."




CHAPTER XIII

SEEING THE "SITUATIONS WANTED" SCENE


"What a lot of things they put in the papers!" Hilaire Belloc observes
somewhere in one of his essays. Indeed, it is so!

I fear, however, that one of the features "they" put in the papers does
not have anything like as popular a reading as it deserves to have.
Those of the governing class, personages who employ people, probably
consult fragments of this department of the newspaper now and then. But,
it may fairly be claimed, nobody reads, with the delicious pleasure and
the abundant profit he might read, that part of the paper fullest of all
of, so to say, meat and gravy.

The story it tells is probably the deepest grounding in life to be found
in print. There as it stands in today's paper Shakespeare (I fancy)
could not have written it, nor Balzac, nor Dickens, nor Arnold Bennett,
nor O. Henry, nor Sinclair Lewis. This newspaper feature is called
"Situations Wanted." It might just as accurately be called "The Human
Scene," or "The Heart of the World," or "The Cry of the Soul." Its tale
is of what all men are seeking (and have ever sought), each in his own
degree, and after his fashion--bread, a place in the sun, a level higher
than that of today.

Let us, briefly, survey this Page of Life.

The most conspicuous figure in the vast and motley throng is the Bold
and Confident Man. He that knows his superior worth and does not propose
to hide his light, he that has the spirit to attack the conqueror. His
method is to fling a large and arresting headline across his "ad." "I AM
THE MAN YOU WANT!" he begins. Or, "PAR-EXCELLENCE," he announces in big
type. Or, "Mr. Busy Manufacturer," he says in good sized "caps"; in
smaller letters asks: "Are you in need of _a competent manager_?" If Mr.
B. M. is in such need, it is squarely put up to him: he "will do well to
address X." To the employer who hesitates this vital opportunity is
lost. The ad says: "Write now--_Right Now!_" Undoubtedly this is the
horse to put your money on; the hero to marry your daughter to. He will
not want.

Our bold, aggressive friend frequently writes, barring a bit of
"bounce," an admirable, clean-cut account of himself. He has, he
declares, acted for some of the leading concerns in the country; he has
never yet failed to give satisfaction; every employer he ever had will
testify to his ability and character. He invites the closest
investigation of his record, and he is open for any engagement where
faithful work, absolute integrity and devotion to his employer's
interests will be productive of "a fair living salary." It is, indeed,
difficult to avoid the impression that this man "has the goods."

Akin to him in his method of a bill-board-like headline is another, of
whom one is not so sure. He does not so much command attention as seek
to beguile it. His particular "lay" is the Ingenious. Here is one
example of his style:

                    AN ADVERTISING ADVENTURER

                   offers 16 years' experience

     (scarred by a few notable defeats and a thorough knowledge edge of
     what NOT to do) to a manufacturer, for whom he will SAVE more than
     his wages; a bad man, who does not drink, never was out of work, is
     married and proud of it; age 32; would rather work than eat.
     Address: Alert.

Then there is the Challenge Not to Be Denied. Here is a sample:
"_Accountant_.--Are you one of the progressive firms? If you are, you
want----" etc. Frequently one comes across the Facetious Advertiser. He
runs some such headline as this: "_Editor for Rent._" Or perhaps he
says: "'_Secretarial Services' For Sale._" In contrast to him is the
advertiser with the Tremulous Appeal. He may begin: "_Who Wants My
Services?_" And go on to say: "I am hard worker and steady, and willing
to go anywhere. Salary about $12 a week." Or perhaps he says:
"_Privilege_ of meeting man who can utilize my services." Or maybe it is
thus: "$15 per Week and an Opportunity." Such a very human ad as this is
likely to continue somewhat like this:

     Can you use a young man of twenty-one--one of really serious
     purpose? I have had enough business experience and training to know
     that to be of help I must do well whatever I am given to do. Of
     course I am looking for a future--but I know that it does not
     matter so much what I do as how I do it. Therefore, I believe any
     reputable business holds a future. I am from Kansas, in New York on
     my own resources and so must have $15 per week to start. I have a
     high school education, and have read a great deal, and have
     attended Business School.

Next is the Poignant ad. The purest example of this which in my studies
I have discovered is headed: "_Who Will Talk With Me?_" A step beyond
this we come upon the Altogether Pitiful. I mean like the one I here
copy out:

     WILL you please find or give office employment to an educated, with
     physical defect, young man; just a chance to work two weeks without
     salary desired?

Akin to the poignant situation-wanted advertisement is the Urgent:
"_Advertising Writer_, college man (Princeton), urgently needs
situation." Or: "_Proofreader_, educated young man, requires position
_immediately_." It is, such is the inference, defective philanthropy in
an employer to delay. A touching figure, too (because he does not
suspect that he is a touching figure), is the Cheery and Hopeful. We
have him here: "_Ambitious_ young American (28) desires position; will
try anything; moderate salary to start."

A wily fellow is the Ingratiating advertiser. Sometimes he is a "Spanish
young man" who offers to work altogether without salary as Spanish
correspondent in some export house "where he could practice English."
Occasionally he is a "copy writer" who, wishing a position with an
agency or mercantile firm, is "willing to demonstrate ability for two
weeks before drawing salary." Now and then a still more positive
character baits the hook with the offer of gratis services. In this
morning's paper a stenographer releases the seductive declaration that
"one trial will demonstrate my value to you."

A rÃ´le played on the stage of the "Situations Wanted" page which I have
always much admired is that of the Highly Dignified. The Bold and
Confident Man, the Ingenious, the Tremulous, the Poignant, the Hopeful,
the Ingratiating--the voices of all these figures touch one with a sense
of the harsh clash of life, its trickiness, its vicissitudes, its pathos
and its tragedy. But "_A Gentleman_ of 50," who, "having a considerable
private income, desires dignified occupation; salary unimportant,"
revives the poetic idea that (at any rate, now and then) God's in His
heaven and all's right with the world. The highly dignified advertiser
certainly is a very enviable character. It must be very nice to be able
to say, as in this advertisement before us: "_Light Occupation of an
Important Nature_ is sought by middle-aged gentleman capable of assuming
control and conducting any normal business enterprise."

A very colorful feature of the "Situations Wanted" page is the
interesting qualifications frequently set forth. Glancing at the paper
in hand I find a young man of twenty-five who seeks a "permanent
position" with a publisher recommending himself as being "affable." Also
here is a "refined gentleman" who desires a "compatible" position and
lists among his accomplishments skill in the art of "tasty drawing." A
"keen discreet American" looking for a job with a "corporation" mentions
his "suave manners." A butler unemployed regards himself as "very nice."
A college graduate of twenty-eight who wants to "begin at the bottom"
asserts that he is a "fluent talker." A "young man with literary
ability" flings out the intimation that he "desires position where it
will be of some use." A dressmaker states that in her calling she is
"perfect." A clerk is "very smart at figures." A nurse puts forward her
asset as a "plain writer." You are pleased to discover that so many
people have a "pleasing personality." And that among stenographers there
are so many who may be described (they say) as an "attractive young
girl." Here is one who introduces herself as both "prepossessing" and
"brainy." A "woman of education" who seeks occupation at "anything
useful if there is friendliness" gives as her leading characteristic a
"sense of humor." Now and then the recommendations offered somewhat
mystify me, as in the advertisement of the lady, "age 29, fine
personality (widow of P. M. of F. and A. M.)." Then there is that great
company who have but one merit to display. They may be represented in
the "Female" column by the "_Respectable_ young woman" who "wishes day's
work." And in the "Male" column by the "_Sober_ man" who (simply)
"desires position." Sometimes here it is difficult to determine the
degree of sobriety maintained, as in the frequent advertisement of the
chauffeur who discreetly states that he is "temperate."

In case you should write down your idea of your own "appearance," what
would you say? I confess that such a problem would puzzle me. It does
not puzzle some. "Situation Wanted" ads record that there are numerous
young men of "exceptional appearance." Though occasionally we come upon
a young man of almost painful conscientiousness who feels that he should
not go further than to say that he is of "fair appearance."

The queer dissimilarity of human aspirations echoes through the
"Situations Wanted" page. Here is a "_Gentleman_, excellent education
and personality, linguist," who wants a position as a companion, or
"courier, &c." A "_Highly_ educated French lady would gladly take a
child for walks every day from 10 to 12." A "_Lady_, 27, of literary
bent desires position as companion around the world." It is remarkable,
the number of persons there are in the world of "literary" tendency.
Remarkable, too, how many people with an inclination to travel. Here is
a "_Cornell Graduate_" who has, apparently, no aversion whatever to
spending the winter in "a warm climate." There are "_Two_ young men,
partners," who "wish to join an expedition, any destination." But there
are home-keeping souls, too. A "_Cultured_ elderly man, neat," craves
"household duties." And so on.

What a rich variety of characters throng the populous scene of the
"Situations Wanted" page! Here, in today's paper, following the
advertisement of a "sculptor" comes that of a "former policeman." A
"_Physician_, practicing twenty years in Paris, speaking English,
French, Spanish, German, Italian, seeking situation," is cheek by jowl
with a "_Plumber_, good all round man." A young man who has "put 9 years
at sea as steward" nonchalantly asks "What have you?" A "_Former
College Professor_, 30, seeks field of occupation in advertising." And a
"_Cavalry_ man, excellent record, wishes position at anything." A
"_Cultured Visiting Governess_ of good family, social position, trains
ladies, English, grammar, literature, elegant correspondence, art of
conversation, current events, social etiquette." A remarkable
"gentleman" presents himself as "qualified to do most anything." And a
"Christian, age 38," wishes a position as "manager of a laundry."

A strategic device frequently employed by the humble is that of getting
someone whose position has weight to present them. For instance, "Rev.
Dr. Moffett recommends a colored man for janitor of a loft building."
And numerous are the gentlemen who, laying up their cars, are interested
in placing their chauffeurs elsewhere.

"_Boy_" is perhaps the word which dominates the page. Most boys,
apparently, are not particular in their choice of a calling. They are
"willing to do anything." Now and then one declares that he is a "good
fighter," or something like that. Here is one who demands a "position
where mental ability will be necessary." Here is another who is very
specific, thus: "15-1/2 years old, 5 feet 8-1/4 inches tall."

Sometimes one meets a very extraordinary character in these columns. The
other day no less a distinguished person than this put in an ad:

     I am compelled, through severe strain, to discontinue my work
     (involving the mental faculties) with which I have puzzled the
     scientific world for several years, and which has netted me a
     weekly income of over $200; I have no other source for a livelihood
     and consequently appeal to the business world for an opportunity to
     grow up in a new endeavor. WHY NOT MEET ME AND TALK IT OVER?

A genuinely touching ad, sensible and obviously quite sincere, in which
you hear the appealing voice of a fellow being in trouble, but an ad
which I fear is rather futile, is one like this:

     Am 43 years old; defective hearing prevents continuation of
     salesman's career; I want situation where this impairment does not
     prevent satisfactory discharge of required duties.

A great, and a grave, lesson may be learned from the "Situations Wanted"
page. And that is to be found mainly in the section where the first word
of each advertisement is simply "MAN." Men there are in it of every age.
I mean in considering the plight of the world one should ponder that
great army whose business is "anything."




CHAPTER XIV

LITERARY LIVES


"My God!" exclaimed the old lady in the railway carriage to Mr. Le
Gallienne, "Tennyson is dead!"

Have not many of us as we have turned the daily papers these last
several years frequently experienced the sensations of this dear old
lady? Whistler, Swinburne, Meredith, Henry James, Howells. They are
dead. Walt Whitman (wasn't it?), when he heard that Carlyle was dead,
went out, and looked up at the stars, and said he didn't believe it.

We have been stirred to these emotional reflections by chancing to come
early this afternoon in the Main Reading Room of the New York Public
Library upon what would commonly be called a well-known book of
reference. We had no intention of doing more than peer into it. Night
found us there--the book still open before us.

The excellent Solomon Eagle (otherwise known as J. C. Squire), in one of
his delightfully gossipy, though erudite, papers contributed to _The New
Statesman_ of London (collected, many of them, into a volume, bearing
the title "Books in General"), remarks of works of reference that they
"are extremely useful; but they resemble Virgil's Hell in that they are
easy things to get into and very difficult to escape from." He
continues:

     Take the EncyclopÃ¦dia. I imagine that my experience with it is
     universal. I have only to dip my toe into this tempting morass and
     down I am sucked, limbs, trunk and all, to remain embedded until
     sleep or a visitor comes to haul me out. A man will read things in
     the EncyclopÃ¦dia that he would never dream of looking at
     elsewhere--things in which normally he does not take the faintest
     interest....

     "Who's Who" takes me in the same way. Ordinarily I have no
     particular thirst for it. I should not dream of carrying it about
     in my waistcoat pocket for perusal on the Underground Railway. But
     once I have allowed myself to open it, I am a slave to it for
     hours. This has just happened to me with the new volume, upon which
     I have wasted a valuable afternoon. I began by looking up a man's
     address; I then read the compressed life-story of the gentleman
     next above him (a major-general), wondering, somewhat idly, whether
     they read of each other's performances and whether either of them
     resented the possession by the other of a similar, and unusual,
     surname. Then I was in the thick of it.

Even so. But an afternoon spent in reading, straight along, the work of
reference we have in mind could not be called wasted. Indeed, quite the
contrary; such an afternoon could be nothing less than one of those
spiritual experiences which suddenly give a measure of growth to the
soul.

The work which we came upon, in the circumstances indicated, was "The
Dictionary of National Biography"; and the volumes which, by chance, we
took down were Volumes II. and III. of the Second Supplement of the
Dictionary. They contain, these volumes, memoirs of 1,135 noteworthy
English persons dying between January 22, 1901, and December 31, 1911.
The alphabet extends from John Faed, artist, to George, Lord Young,
Scottish Judge. The contributors number 357; the list of these names is
a roll of the most distinguished, in all departments, in the English
Nation of our day. This publication, we should say, is the most
interesting to English-speaking people, as in all probability it is the
most important, generally, issued within at any rate the year of its
publication. And though we cannot rid ourselves of a melancholy feeling
in contemplating this survey of the great stream of brilliant life
ended, we feel there is more good reading for the money in these pages
than in any other book one is likely to come across at random.

The toll these ten years have taken! The chronicle is here of some born
to greatness, like Queen Victoria; of those, like Cecil Rhodes, who have
achieved it. And the stories are told of some whom the world's fame
found but within the last hour, then dead: John Millington Synge
(contributed by John Masefield), and Francis Thompson (by Everard
Meynell).

The proportion of biographies of men of letters predominates in
considerable measure. Science follows in the list, then art. The least
but one, sport, is the law. Among the names of women, forty-six in
number, are Florence Nightingale, Kate Greenaway, Charlotte Mary Yonge,
and Mrs. Craigie (John Oliver Hobbes).

Three illustrious lives entered the twentieth century in England as full
of years as of honors. Meredith, Whistler, and Swinburne were born in
the Spring of the nineteenth century, in 1828, 1834, and 1837
respectively, and the bloom of their days was with the giants, now
legends, of the Victorian reign. The Kings in the history of art and
letters have been--have they not?--gallant men. We suspect that it takes
a gallant man to be a King in these callings. Of these three--two
wished to be soldiers--the most gallant spirit was the great-grandson of
a rather grand tailor.

He won what men can and he bore what men must, is some ancient line.

The most extensive article in these volumes is the "Meredith," by Thomas
Seccombe. It is the richest. Twelve pages is its compass. As a biography
we are disposed to rank it with--let's see?---Froude's "Carlyle" (4
vols. 8vo.). Perhaps, on the whole, it is better. To go into any detail
in our notice of the appearance of these books, and maintain any
perspective, would carry us to a vast length. The bibliographer is
deeply impressed with the character of Meredith, as a man, throughout
his life, of noble aspect. His critical verdict reduced to one word is:
"Thoroughly tonic in quality, his writings are [as Lamb said of
Shakespeare] essentially manly." This is one of the pictures which most
brightly sticks in our head:

     On the terrace in front of the chalet, whence he descended to
     meals, he was often to be heard carrying on dialogues with his
     characters, and singing with unrestrained voice. Whimsical and
     sometimes Rabelaisian fabrications accompanied the process of
     quickening the blood by a spin [a favorite word with him] over
     Surrey hills. Then he wrote his master works, ... and welcomed his
     friends, often reading aloud to them in magnificent recitative,
     unpublished prose or verse.

If there is anything upon which an article could be "based" not included
in Mr. Seccombe's list of sources, it's a queer thing.

The "Swinburne" is furnished by Edmund Gosse, whose adequate equipment
for the task includes "personal recollections extending over more than
forty years." Passages of his portrait of the radiant poet are the most
colorful in these volumes of the Dictionary. By way of critical
discussion the writer says: "It is a very remarkable circumstance, which
must be omitted in no outline of his intellectual life, that his
opinions, on politics, on literature, on art, on life itself, were
formed in boyhood, and that though he expanded he scarcely advanced in
any single direction after he was twenty. If growth had continued as it
began, he must have been the prodigy of the world. Even his art was at
its height when he was five and twenty." The Whistler article is by Sir
Walter Armstrong (who writes also on Holman Hunt) and is, one feels, the
most judicial summary that has appeared on the most controversial
subject, one can readily recall, of the epoch closed. A very clear
statement of a principle of the art of painting is this: "For years his
work bore much the same relation to Japanese art as all fine painting
does to nature. He took from Japanese ideals the beauties he admired,
and re-created them as expressions of his own personality."

There is one delightful anecdote, in E. V. Lucas's sketch of Phil May.
His Punch editor, Sir Francis Burnand, tells a story to the effect that
on being asked at a club for a loan of fifty pounds, May produced all he
had--half that amount--and then abstained from the club for some time
for fear of meeting the borrower, because he felt that "he still owed
him twenty-five pounds."

Sensible persons will read with satisfaction the just article by T. F.
Henderson on that fine figure Henley, "one of the main supports," said
Meredith, "of good literature in our time." Many good folks will like to
look up Leslie Stephen, the first editor of this Dictionary, "who
enjoyed the affectionate admiration of his most enlightened
contemporaries." The article is by the present editor, Sir Sidney Lee.
Ãsthetically minded persons may read about William Sharpe. Among the
painters are Watts (biographer, Sir Sidney Colvin) and Orchardson. The
"Seymour Haden" is furnished by A. M. Hind. Memoirs of Sir Henry Irving,
Sir Theodore Martin, and Herbert Spencer come in this supplement. And so
on. A piece of American history is related here, too, in the account of
Edward Lawrence Godkin, founder of _The Nation_.

A subject of emotional literary controversy at the present moment is
treated by Thomas Seccombe in his article on George Gissing. The general
qualities of the Dictionary may be clearly observed in this notice. When
the first volume of this second supplement--A to Evans--was issued not
long ago rumors reached us of some agitation occasioned in England by
the unepitaphical character of the memoirs of Edward VII. Well,
discrimination was not made against a King. The frankness of this high
tribunal in its calm recital of facts is striking.

After some steady reading of the great Dictionary we wonder if printed
forms had been sent to the contributors, upon which they composed, in
answer to the questions there, their articles: the order of progress of
all the memoirs is, in effect, so uniform. Each says at (it appeared)
about the same point: His appearance was this. Each seems to conclude
with a list of the portraits.

And this idea recalled to us a story. A foreigner entering our country's
gates, upon being asked to fill out papers setting forth his
nationality, age, color, and so on, wrote beside the query,
"Business?"--"Rotten." In this intelligent interpretation of the
question, the "business" of many whose lives are recorded in honor here
was "rotten" for many a long year.

The story of literature has not ceased to be a sorry story; still, as
was said on a time, comparable to the annals of Newgate. A tale it
continues, in a large measure, of outcast experience, of destitution,
"seeking a few pence by selling matches or newspapers," or development
through suffering, of hospital sojourns, of contemplated suicide, of
unfortunate "amorous propensities," of "ill-considered" marriage, of
that immemorial "besetting weakness," of "a curious inability to do the
sane, secure thing in the ordinary affairs of life," of "ordering his
life with extreme carelessness in financial matters," of the weariness
of reward for work of high character long deferred, of charitable
legacies "from a great-aunt."

Mr. Wells speaks somewhere of the amazing persistency of the instinct
for self-expression. Where it exists, one reflects in musing on these
biographies, you can't kill it with a club.

Very imposing we felt the literary style of this Dictionary to be. It
treats of a man much as if he were a word, say, in the Century
Dictionary. This is the sort of biographical writing, we said, that a
man with whiskers can read. It does sound something like a court
calendar. Its tone is omniscient, indeed. But the Recording Angel here
does not drop a tear upon the oath of any Uncle Toby and blot it out
forever. No. He says, of one we tremble to name, "his language was often
beyond the reach of apology." Fine is the dignity with which sordid
things are related. "The return journey he was under the necessity of
performing on foot." Almost grotesque is the neglect of the caressing
touch of sentiment. "His own wish was to be a jockey." The treatment of
the theme of love is entertaining. "At the age of nineteen he married."

August is the passivity in the presence of the Reaper who mows the
golden grain. Without poetry, oh, Death, where is thy sting! In these
volumes, of none is it sighed: At twilight his spirit fled. Had he but
lived ...! It is: He died December 14, 1908. He left no issue. A fair
portrait of him by Charles Ricketts is in the possession of Mr. Edmund
Gosse.

We arose after several hours' reading with a sense of having perused for
a space two recent volumes of the Book of Judgment. We were full of
emotion. We felt the mystery of the destiny of man. How admirable he is
and how pitiful! Throbbing, we went forth into the throbbing city.




CHAPTER XV

SO VERY THEATRICAL


There is a young woman I thought of taking there for luncheon the other
day, but when I called for her it did not seem to me that she had used
her lip-stick that morning--and so we went somewhere else.

She is pretty good-looking and was dressed not at all unfashionably. She
would have done all right at the Waldorf, or at the Vanderbilt, or
Biltmore, or Ritz-Carlton, or Ambassador. Indeed, I don't know but that
at some such place as that I should have been rather proud of her.

But, you see, for the place I had in mind her skirt was a little too
long--it came almost halfway to her ankles. Her bosom was quite covered.
She moves with fair grace, but without striking sinuousness. And I
suddenly recollected that she does not smoke much.

No; I saved myself just in time; I should have been chagrined,
embarrassed, most decidedly uncomfortable; she would have been
conspicuous. I should probably have lost caste with the waiters, too;
and not again have been able to get a table after the plush rope had
been thrown across the entrance to the dining-room; which, so keen is
competition for places there, is shortly before one o'clock.

If you know where this place is, why, of course, all right. But nobody
has any business to go shouting all over the housetops exactly where it
is. People who aren't just naturally by temperament a part of the
picture oughtn't to know how to find it. Though it is a perfectly good
bet that bunches of them would like to know.

But that's just the way so many of these havens of the elect get ruined.
A lot of curious "visitors" go piling in right along; the scene soon
loses all its authenticity; and shortly becomes bogus altogether. Why, I
can remember when artists--painters and writers--lived in Greenwich
Village. There, in those days.... But all that was years ago.

This much only will I tell you about the location of the most
_distinguÃ©_ place there is in which to have luncheon. The centre of the
inhabited world is, of course, Longacre Square, that widened curving
stretch of Broadway looking north several blocks from the narrow stern
of the gracefully towering Times Building, rising from its site of a bit
of an island surrounded by four surging currents of traffic. A few miles
away (from Longacre Square) the provinces begin. But there, the most
gleaming spot on this our globe under the canopy of the purple night, is
the quintessence, the apex of human life.... I am here speaking, of
course, in the spirit of those of that nomad race whose hopes for gold
and fame lie through the "stage entrance"--I mean the ladies and
gentlemen of the theatre.

To the east just off Longacre Square along the crosstown streets is a
medley of offices of divers theatrical and screen journals, chop-houses,
and innumerable band-box hotels whose names doubtless only a district
messenger boy could recite in any number. The particular one for which
we are headed is famous enough to those familiar with fame of this
character. Here the "Uncle Jack" of the American stage, Mr. Drew, for
some time made his residence. It is always the stopping place in New
York of perhaps the finest of our novelists, Joseph Hergesheimer. That
mystical Indian gentleman, Mr. Rabindranath Tagore, has found it a not
unworthy tent on his western pilgrimages. And so on.

You cannot be long in its rich little lobby without overhearing struck
the high note of its distinctive clientele. "Where do you open?" asks
someone of someone else. And the answer is not unlikely to be: "At
Stamford. When do you close?" In the subdued light bare satin arms and
enspiriting lengths of colorful stocking flash from the deep chairs
where feminine forms are waiting. A graceful hand opens a telephone
booth to expel a smoking cigarette.

Here enters Walter Prichard Eaton, come down from his Berkshire farm for
the height of the theatrical season. A tall, leisurely, very New
Englandish, smooth-shaven young man, now coming decidedly grey just over
the ears. Entering the dining-room we come plump against our old friend
Meredith Nicholson lunching with a bevy of friends. A youthful fifty
perhaps now, the author of one of the best sellers of any day, "The
House of a Thousand Candles." Clean-shaven, with a physiognomy
suggesting that of a Roman senator. What has brought him just now from
Indiana? Well, he is revolving in his mind the idea of writing a new
play, as soon, he adds, as he "can find the right ink." Hasn't been
able to get hold of any that just suited him.

But much more important to his mind, apparently, than this play is
another mission in which he has become involved. He is going to have
himself "mapped," that is, have his horoscope cast. Yes, by one of the
ladies of his party, who, it appears, is eminent as a professor of this
science, now rapidly coming into a period of great vogue. When he has
supplied her with the data concerning his birth she will reveal to him
the course of his career through 1922.

On a number of the tables are cards marked "Reserved." Around two sides
of the room upholstered seats running the length of the wall seat
couples in greater intimacy of tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte side by side before their
little tables. Most of the young women present--but could you really
call many of them young women?... Their most striking feature, after the
dizziness of their beauty, and the ravishing audacity of their clothes,
is the bewitching tenderness of their years. More than several of these
dainty, artfully rose-cheeked smokers look to be hardly past seventeen.
Their foppishly dressed male companions frequently are in effect far
from anything like such youth; and in a number of cases are much more
likely to remind you of Bacchus than of Apollo.

Two of these misses nearby are discussing with one another their
"doorman." "Isn't he," exclaims one, "the very dearest old doorman you
have ever seen in all of your whole life!" Yes, it would seem that,
peering down the long vista of the past, from out of their experience of
hundreds of theatres, neither of these buds of womanhood could recall
any doorman so "dear" as their present one.

The dominant group in the room is a gay and populous party about a large
round table in the centre. And undoubtedly the dominant figure of this
party is, you recognize, Alexander Woollcott, dramatic critic of the New
York _Times_, invariably at this same table at this same hour, a very
spirited, a very round plump young man, very dapper to the end of every
hair in his trim little black moustache. Next to him who is that? Why,
goodness me! if it isn't Edna Ferber, who, though I doubt not she would
not want to be counted in the fledgling class of some of our soubrette
friends here, indeed does seem to be getting younger all the while.

Joining this party now is an odd and rather humorous looking figure,
tall, amusingly stooping and amusingly ample of girth for a character of
such apparently early manhood, an intensely black crop of hair and a
very blackish streak of moustache, soft collar, unpressed clothes. Sits
down, hooping himself over his plate with a suggestion of considerable
shyness. Gives you an impression, perhaps by the brightness of his eyes,
of Puckish mirth playing within his mind. Heywood Broun.

At the table on our right we perceive a very popular lady known to us,
Miss Margaret Widdemer, or, as she now is, Mrs. Robert Haven Schauffler.
Her general air breathing the simplicity of a milkmaid amid this scene.
Under her mammoth floppy hat reminding you of an early summer rose. She
is discussing with a spectacled person who looks as if he might have
something to do with book publishing whether her next book should be a
light romance on the order of her "Wishing-Ring Man" and "Rose Garden
Husband" or she should come into the new movement of serious "Main
Street" kind of realism.

And there, on our left, certainly is a publisher, Mr. Liveright of the
firm of Boni and Liveright. Young fellow, thirty-five perhaps. Maybe he
is talking about some of his striking successes, such as "Potterism" and
"From Mayfair to Moscow." With him Ludwig Lewisohn, literary and
dramatic critic.

Back of us we detect young Burton Rascoe, former literary editor of the
Chicago Tribune, newly arrived in New York as managing editor of
_McCall's Magazine_, and to whom (by the way) the suppressed novel
"Jurgen" was dedicated. You wouldn't think anybody would be so frowning
as to want to suppress Mr. Rascoe. He looks as if he might be twin
brother to any dewy bud here.

Who is that he is with? Theodore Maynard, I declare. Young English poet,
critic and novelist. And the other side of him is a gentleman, Oliver
Saylor by name, who at the height of the revolution went to Russia to
study the Russian drama, and engrossed in Ã¦sthetics lived for a time in
quarters midway between the contending military forces. Beyond we see a
young lady recently come on from Ted Shawn's song and dance studio in
Los Angeles.

And yonder you see a young man who is just as dear and sweet as he can
be. He served his country during the war by knitting a sweater and a
"helmet" for a poet he knew in the army in France. He, this dainty
youth, looks pretty much lip-sticked himself. In order not to sin
against daintiness this young person has a habit of powdering his nose.
A coarse friend of his forbade his doing this, and the next time he met
him neatly powdered rebuked him for it. Whereupon the young man replied:
"Oh! You wouldn't (would you?) let a little powder come between
friends."

And, finally, here most happily we are ourselves.




CHAPTER XVI

OUR STEEPLEJACK OF THE SEVEN ARTS


There is a rather frisky looking apartment house there now, a pastry
shop and tea room occupying the ground floor--behind it, the other side
of a venerable brick wall, a tiny, ancient burying ground. But in days
of yester-year here stood a tavern of renown, the Old Grape Vine, which
on this site, Sixth Avenue at Eleventh Street, had given cheer since
Sixth Avenue was little more than a country road. A sagging, soiled
white, two-story frame structure, with great iron grill lamps before the
door. Within, the main room was somewhat reminiscent of London's Olde
Cheshire Cheese.

The proprietor was a canny Scot, one MacClellan. ("Old Mac"! Whither has
he gone?) I was coming along by there the other day, and I asked a man
with whom I chanced to walk if he remembered the Old Grape Vine. "Ah!
yes;" he said; "they had mutton pies there." They did. And excellent
ale, also, served in battered pewter mugs. "They" had here, too (some
fifteen years ago), excellent society beneath the dingy light. Roaring,
roistering George Luks (as he was then) very much to the fore. At the
rickety mahogany table where Frans-Halsian George held forth frequently
was to be found the painter William J. Glackens and his brother "Lew,"
humorous draughtsman for _Puck_. Ernest Lawson sometimes came in. A Mr.
Zinzig, a very pleasant soul and an excellent pianist and teacher of the
piano, often was of the company. A Mr. FitzGerald, art critic in those
days of the _Sun_, sometimes "sat in." And a delightful old cock, Mr.
Stephenson, art critic then of the _Evening Post_. Among the most
devoted habituÃ©s of the place was an old-school United States army
officer turned writer of military stories. (When the proceedings had
progressed to a certain stage of mellowness it was his habit to go home
and return directly arrayed in his uniform.) There was, too, a queer
figure of a derelict journalist associated with _Town Topics_. There was
an inoffensive gentleman of leisure whose distinction was that he was
brother to a famous Shakespearean scholar. (As the hour grew late he
would begin to whistle softly to himself through his teeth.) There was a
rotund being of much reading who perpetually smoked a very old pipe and
who was editor of a tobacco journal. There was a man of the sea who
continually told stories of Japan. (After eleven he was somewhat given
to singing.) There was an illustrator for a tu'penny magazine, who (so
as to seem to be a large staff) signed a variety of names to his work.
From the land of R. L. S., he. One time while in a doze (somewhere else)
he was robbed. His comment upon his misfortune became a classic line. It
was: "By heaven! As long as whiskey is sold to lose ten dollars is
enough to drive a Scot mad!" (This was long before anybody had ever
heard of the now illustrious Mr. Volstead.) And many more there were.
Ah, me! ah, me! How the picture has changed!

Well, the point of all this (if it have any point) is that it was in the
Old Grape Vine (of tender memory) that I first saw James Gibbons
Huneker. I think that, in his promenades as an impressionist, he was
there but seldom. Though we know that high among the Seven Arts he rated
the fine art of drinking Pilsner. The old places of Martin's and
LÃ¼chow's (headquarters on a time for the musical cognoscenti) were ports
of call on his rounds; and he moved freely, I believe, among the places
of refreshment along the foreign quarter of lower Fourth Avenue. At the
Grape Vine, I understand, he was an especial friend of Luks, and
probably of Glackens and Lawson. And, though he was a very famous man,
he seemed to like the motley company.

Ten or twelve years ago I was earning a living more honestly than
perhaps I have been making one since. I was a clerk in a book store--the
retail department, it happened, of the house which publishes Mr.
Huneker's books. And there, from my position "on the floor," I
frequently saw him moving in and out. Moving rather slowly, with the
dignity of bulk. A distinguished figure, quietly but quite neatly
dressed, very erect in carriage, head held well back, supporting his
portliness with that physical pride of portly men, a physiognomy of
Rodinesque modelling--his cane a trim touch to the ensemble. He was, I
distinctly remember, held decidedly in regard by the retail staff
because he was (what, by a long shot, a good many "authors" were not)
exceedingly affable in manner to us clerks.

The moment I have particularly in mind was when Samuel Butler's volume
"The Way of All Flesh" first appeared in an American edition. We all
know all about Butler now. But, looking back, it certainly is
astonishing how innocent most all of us then were of any knowledge of
the great author of "Erewhon." Even so searching a student of literature
as W. C. Brownell was practically unacquainted with Butler. He was
taking home a copy of "The Way of All Flesh" to read. Mr. Huneker was
standing by. In some comment on the book he remarked that Butler had
been a painter. "A painter!" exclaimed Mr. Brownell, in a manner as
though wondering how it came about he knew so little of the man. "But
this," said Mr. Huneker, referring to the novel, "is not his best stuff.
That is in his note-books." Brownell: "And where are they?" Huneker: "In
the British Museum." Mr. Brownell made a fluttering gesture (as though
to express that he "gave up") toward Mr. Huneker: "He knows everything!"
he ejaculated.

We should, of course, be surprised now that anybody _did not_ know that
Butler had been a painter. When, just a short time ago, W. Somerset
Maugham adapted for the purposes of his sensational novel "The Moon and
Sixpence" the character and career of Paul Gauguin, it was in the pages
of Huneker that many first looked for, and found, intelligence
concerning the master of the Pont Aven school of painting. Well, Gauguin
is now an old story. And Ibsen, Tolstoy, Wagner, Richard Strauss,
Rimbaud, De Gourmont, Nietzsche, Meredith, Henry James, William James,
Bergson, BarrÃ¨s, Anatole France, Flaubert, LemaÃ®tre, Huysmans,
Maeterlinck, Baudelaire, Stirner, Strindberg, Faguet, Shaw, Wilde,
George Moore, Yeats, Synge, Schnitzler, Wederkind, Lafargue, Rodin,
CÃ©zane, Matisse, Picasso, Van Gogh, George Luks, that wondrous "flock of
Unicorns"--they all are old stories, too ... now. But it was our
Steeplejack, James Huneker, who was our pioneer watcher of the skies.
And what in the large sweep of his vision of the whole field of the
world's beauty he saw, he reported with infinite gusto. "Gusto," as H.
L. Mencken in the Huneker article of his "Book of Prefaces" says,
"unquenchable, contagious, inflammatory."

The extent of the personal contact which Mr. Huneker enjoyed and
maintained with the first-rate literary men of the world was amazing.
While I was with the book shop I speak of, "presentation copies" of each
new book of his, to be sent out "with the compliments of the author,"
were piled up for forwarding literally several feet high. They went to
all the great in letters, in every country, that you could think of.
Anatole France, Joseph Conrad, Henry James, George Brandes, Edmund
Gosse, George Moore--people like that.

Vast was the incoming stream of books to him, presentation copies,
review copies, "publicity" copies; so great a flood that it was
necessary for him periodically to call in an old book man to clear his
shelves by carting away a wagon-load or two of--genuine treasure. A
catalogue I one time saw of such volumes "from the library of James
Huneker" was sufficient in riches to have been the catalogue of the
entire stock of a very fair shop dealing in "association" volumes, first
editions, and so forth. And a survey of the books themselves made it
quite apparent that a reader who has read every word that Huneker ever
printed (and that would be a person who had read a good deal) may yet
(very likely) be a reader who has not read some of the best of Huneker.
I refer to "Jimmie's" humorous, pungent marginalia.

Mr. Huneker's close friends have taken occasion since his death to speak
warmly of his kindness toward obscure, struggling talent. There was a
side to him, akin to this, which I have not seen commented upon.
Huneker's fame as a critic had been for years accepted throughout
Europe. When his "New Cosmopolis" was published (a book I did not myself
think so highly of) Joyce Kilmer, then newly come to journalism,
reviewed it for the New York _Times_, very eulogistically. Mr. Huneker
went to the trouble of looking up Kilmer to thank him very simply for
his praise.

Mr. Huneker was a loyal and disinterested servant of good literature
wherever he found it, and his happily was the power to be an ambassador
to success. So short a time as about four years ago very few people had
heard of William McFee. "Aliens," his first book, had met with no
appreciable success. The manuscript of "Casuals of the Sea" (or the
English "sheets" of the book, I do not recall which) came into the hands
of a publishing house at Garden City. A member of the editorial staff of
this house at this time was Christopher Morley. And I happened at the
moment to have a job as sort of handy man at editorial chores around the
premises. Morley immediately became a great "fan" for the book.
Undoubtedly a fine book, and it was accepted, but (there was a question)
could it be "put across"? It was very long, not of obviously popular
character, and the author's name commanded no attention at all.

The first "advance" copy of the book sent out went (at Morley's
direction) to Mr. Huneker. He was then writing regularly critical
articles for something like a half dozen publications. "Casuals of the
Sea" (such things did not turn up every day) was a "find" for his
enthusiasm, He "pulled" two columns of brilliant Hunekerean firecrackers
about it in the New York _Sun_; wrote another article of length on the
book for the New York _Times_; gave the volume a couple of paragraphs of
mention in his department on the Seven Arts at that time running in
_Puck_, and perhaps mentioned the book elsewhere also. With the weight
of such fervor and authority "Casuals" was most auspiciously launched.
It could not now, by any chance, be passed by.

I do not, of course, mean to imply that there was anything artificial or
"manufactured" about the "vogue" of "Casuals." First, Mr. Huneker was
not a reviewer but a critic, if not thoroughly a great one, certainly a
very real one; and about the last man going who could be got to "push"
anything he did not whole-heartedly believe was fine. And secondly,
"Casuals" had "the goods."

Through my connection with the matter of "Casuals" I suppose it was that
a correspondence came about between Mr. Huneker and me. And in all my
days I have never seen so energetic a correspondent. It seems to me that
I got a letter from him about every other morning. I dropped out of the
publishing business and went to Indiana for a time. I let him know when
I got there, my motive in this being mainly to notify him that I _was_
out of the publishing business and so was no longer in a position to
give any business attention to letters relating to books. But letters
from him continued to reach me with the same regularity. While, I
hardly need say, I enjoyed this correspondence enormously, I was
decidedly embarrassed by it, as I could not but keenly feel that I was
taking up his time to no purpose. Still, of course, I felt that I should
answer each letter of his without an impolite delay, and no sooner did
he get my reply than he answered back again. Gradually, however, we got
the thing slowed down.

His letters were prodigal of witty things. I am afraid I have not kept
them; if so I do not know where they are--I move about a good deal. One
neat play of words I remember. I do not know whether or not he himself
ever used it elsewhere. I did use it in a book, giving due credit to Mr.
Huneker. I had told him that I was going in for writing on my own. His
comment was: "He that lives by the pen shall perish by the pen." Some of
his letters, I recall, were signed, "Jim, the Penman."

And it was no simple trick to read them. He used a pale ink. The
handwriting was small, curious, and to me almost illegible. Why
compositors did not mob him I do not know. He wrote everything by hand;
never would learn to use a typewriter, and declared that he could not
acquire the faculty of dictation.

This leads me to the story of one of the articles he contributed to _The
Bookman_. When, upon my return to New York, I became (for a time) editor
of this magazine I pursued him for contributions. Yes, later on he would
send us something, but always it was later on, later on. I had about
given up hope of ever getting anything from him when a bulky wad of
closely-written "copy" on yellow paper arrived. Expecting that it would
take me a couple of days to decipher the manuscript, I joyously
acknowledged receipt of it at once, without a thought of questioning the
nature of the article. When I tried to read the article, after I had
held the first page sidewise, next upside down, then examined it in a
mirror, I "passed the buck" and sent the copy straight on to the
printers. If printers had read him before printers ought to be able to
do so again. I advertised the article to appear in the next number of
the magazine. When I got the article back in galley proofs--I got a
jolt. It wasn't "_Bookman_ stuff" at all, all about a couple of "old
rounders," as Mr. Huneker called them, taking a stroll.

I do not think that Mr. Huneker has as yet since his death, to the time
these rambling remarks are being written, received anything like
adequate recognition in the press. The "obituary" articles in the
newspapers have carried the air that he was hardly more than an
excellent "newspaper man"--somewhat older, but something like (dare I
say?) Heywood Broun or Alexander Woollcott. Ah! no; James Huneker was a
critic and an artist, and a figure, too, in our national life. Though he
was all his days until almost his last breath a hard-working journalist
with an immediate "copy date" before him. And though he most naturally
thought of himself, with common-sense pride in his calling, as a
journalist. I remember his one time speaking of Arnold Bennett as "a
hard-working journalist as well as a novel writer." Indicating his great
esteem for the character of journalist. And he used to speak, too, with
fraternal pride and affection in inflection, of young men who had
written good books, as being among "our men," meaning associated with
the same paper as himself.

At the remarkable funeral service held in the new Town Hall in New York
high and touching honor was done his memory by the stage and the musical
profession, but literature seemed to be officially represented by the
person of Richard Le Gallienne alone, and painting and sculpture not at
all. The articles by Mr. Huneker's colleagues among music critics have
seemed very largely to claim him as quite their own. True, no doubt, his
most penetrating writing was done in the field of musical criticism.
But, also, Huneker was an evangel who belongs to the Seven Arts.

One thing should be added. It is a sad thing, but it is of the nature of
life. A good editorial in _The New Republic_ began: "James Huneker named
one of his best books 'The Pathos of Distance.' In a single day his own
figure is invested with the memorial gentleness there described." No,
not altogether in a single day. He had already begun, and more than
begun, to recede into the pathos of distance. His _flair_ was for the
championship and interpretation of the "new" men. And, for the most
part, his new men had become old men. His stoutest admirer must admit
that Mr. Huneker's work was "dated."

But where (and this is sadder still) is his like today?




CHAPTER XVII

FORMER TENANT OF HIS ROOM


There are certain things which must be done, to yield their best, when
one is young. For one thing, there is only one time in life to run away
to sea. If you did not run away to sea when you were a lad, it is too
late now for you to get any sport out of it. 'Tis something the same
with living in a garret or in a hall bedroom. If you did not read
"Robinson Crusoe" when you were a boy there is no use for you to read it
now; you will not understand it. There are some other things you can
enjoy when you are old--grandchildren, for instance. But the time to
come up to a great city is when one is young. The time to walk up
Broadway at night, and feel a gusto about it, and Fifth Avenue by day,
is when one is young. That is an enchanted time, when it is a fine
dashing thing to be doing, to live at a second-rate boarding house; when
discouragement is adventure; when it is worth while even to be poor;
when one makes life-long friends at sight; when young love is sipped;
when courage is ever stout in one's breast; when one's illusions are
virgin yet; and all's right with the world. At that season one can swell
with a rich personal pride in "Shanley's" and, almost at the same time,
eat one's own theatre supper in a "Dairy Lunch" room, where every
customer is his own waiter as well, and where his table is the broadened
arm of his chair against the wall.

Richard Day, student at the law, munched his egg sandwich (egg sandwich
was the favorite dish at the "Dairy Lunches" until eggs got so high) and
drank his coffee from a cup that remarkably resembled in shape a shaving
mug and was decorated in similar fashion. The blocks of sugar (two for
Richard) for this stimulating beverage (made out of chicory) were taken
by the customer with his fingers from a heaping-full sort of great
punch-bowl mounted on a pedestal in the middle of the room. It was drawn
from a nickel-plated engine with glass tubes by a young man in a white
coat like a barber's, who served it, with crullers, piece of pie, or
sandwich, across a kind of little bar at the rear end of the long room.

Day scorned the packed, parading trolley cars, and swung vigorously up
the street. Far up the thoroughfare an enormous electric sign (in its
size suggesting that it had been somehow brought back by Gulliver from
the country of Brobdingnag and mounted here upon a sturdy little
building for awful exhibition) its gigantic illuminated letters spelling
"Arthur Pendennis Ten Cent Cigar," lighted the mist for blocks
approaching it, and marked the north boundary of the dominion for
revelry. The sidewalks were much quieter now. One of those birds of the
urban night deftly wheeled his vehicle alongside our pedestrian and
pulled his clattering quadruped violently back upon its haunches until
it slid along the slippery pavement. "Cab, sir? Cab?" Then he whisked
away again. It was not long before Richard had entered into the district
of slumbering residences, and not much longer until he ran up the steps
before his own door, or, speaking more literally, his own landlady's
door. It is not much to mount three pairs of stairs in the brave days
when one is twenty-one, and Day was in the little room, where, rich only
in the glory of his rising sun, in his youth, he weathered it so long.

This apartment was the width of the dark hall, which was face to face
with it, about fourteen feet long, and furnished in tune, so to speak.
An uncommonly small, old-fashioned, wooden bedstead, a bantam-size
"dresser," a washstand its shorter brother, a small table or "stand,"
and two half-grown chairs, mature before their season, were the
principal articles of furniture. The room was heated by an oil stove
that had passed the age of vanity in one's appearance; it was lighted at
night by a gas-jet, without a globe; by day through a single window,
which occupied between a half and a third of the wall space of the front
end of the room, and which balanced in decorative effect with the door
at the other end. A row of books was arranged along the dresser top
against the lower part of the small looking-glass. Two pictures (the
property of Day), one of Lincoln and one of Roosevelt squinting in the
sunlight (this is a land where every young man may hope to be
President), were tacked on the walls. In company with these were a
combination calendar and fire-insurance advertisement and a card
displaying a lithographed upper part and idealistic legs of a blithe
young woman wearing, stuck on, a short, bright skirt made of sandpaper
and streaked with match-scratches, who in fancy letters was ingeniously
labelled "A Striking Girl." These bits of applied art were properties of
Mrs. Knoll's establishment.

Day's dresser had several small drawers and a little square door. He had
one day discovered adhering to the back of this door a hardened piece of
chewing gum, and from this he had deduced that a former tenant of the
room had been a woman, presumably a young one (for surely there is an
age after which one knows better). He sometimes speculated on the
subject of the former tenant, and he was of three minds about her
vocation. Sometimes he thought she had been a school-teacher, sometimes
he thought an art student, and again a clerk in a store. He
reconstructed her as having had red hair and having been a bit frowsy.
But whatever she had been she had slept on a mighty hard little bed, and
he felt something like a tenderness for her on that account.

When he had got home from the theatre, Richard sat on the edge of his
bed (it seemed always somehow the most natural place in the room to
sit), and smoked his pipe. One Christmas Day he and his bosom friend had
gone together and bought pipes exactly alike, then each had given his
to the other. Years later Day was compelled to give up smoking, and he
was never exactly the same again. But when he was young the gods blessed
him. He smoked his pipe out, then he slowly pulled off his shoes. That
is, he pulled off one shoe and sat abstractedly a considerable while
with it in his hand. He had many thoughts, mainly associated with an
unknown young lady he had seen that evening at the theatre. He wished he
had had on a different style of collar--and he would have had if his
laundryman had kept his word. However, he thought rather sadly what
booted it to him now. Then he roused himself, slowly undressed, put on
his pajamas (his mother had made them for him), turned off his light,
pulled up his window curtain (so the morning light would waken him), and
got into bed.

Richard fell into a great many adventures in his night's sleep. He
fought bandits, with never any cartridges in his gun; he travelled
across plains that appeared to be constructed on the principle of a
treadmill; he visited sundry peculiar places and did divers queer things
with solemnity and without surprise. After a while it seemed to him
that he was somewhere talking with, or rather to, the former tenant of
his room. But the former tenant did not have red hair; her hair was the
loveliest brown; nor was she the least bit frowzy; she was the very
opposite extreme to that. Nor clerk nor teacher nor student was she. She
was a bright princess. Her complexion had rather more of the rose than
of the lily. Her pure and eloquent blood spoke in her cheeks. She and
the lady he had seen at the theatre were one and the same person. He
could not make out exactly how he came to know she was the former
tenant, but that seemed to be considered so very well understood he felt
ashamed to speak about it.

He was saying to her some of the cleverest things he had ever heard. He
surprised himself as he listened to himself; and he was much elated; for
if ever he wished to speak well, now was the time. Now Day was really a
very clever fellow, as well as a comely one (this is only a story of his
youth, but in after life he became a distinguished man), and, like all
very clever fellows, he was never perfectly happy except when his
talents were recognized and appreciated. Here in his dream he had come
into his own. It was a night to be marked with a white stone. One of the
things that particularly impressed him in this dream was his impression
that it was not a dream.

In the morning it was always colder in Day's room than at night, and
always it seemed somehow lonesomer. It was bare then, and not cozy. To
come directly from such an especially comfortable dream into the cold,
grey dawn, and find one's window opaque with frost and one's breath like
steam in the air, requires a little time for one to adjust oneself to
the transition. Richard lay a little time generating courage to get up.
He did not immediately shake off his dream entirely; but crumbs of it
stuck to his mind, like the last of a fine cake on the face. But it was
as if his cake had turned cold in the mouth. He squirmed in bed with
embarrassment when he reviewed those clever things, on which he had so
plumed himself, that he had said to the former tenant. They were so very
poor and flat that he tried to stop his mind against the recollection of
them. And even the former tenant herself, as she faded now more into the
night, and he came more out into the morning, was like Cinderella as
she fled from the hall back to her kitchen. But Richard caught up the
crystal slipper that remained to him and in his bosom bore it forth into
the day.




CHAPTER XVIII

ONLY SHE WAS THERE


Directly in the intense emphasis of white light from an arc lamp
overhead, and standing about midway in the long, dark, thickly-packed
line of people waiting, was a young man decidedly above the middle
stature, in a long outer coat. He was broad in the shoulders, formed in
excellent proportion, apparently in about the first or second and
twentieth year of his age. His forehead was intelligent, his nose
exceptionally good, his mouth rather big and lips full, his chin round
and with a cleft in the centre. His hair, chestnut, moderately cropped,
discovered, what of it was visible below his hat, a decided inclination
to curl. He was redolent of health and the unmined masculine vigor
pertaining to his time of life. As the earliest ancestor of this kind of
historical writing would have said, "He was one of the handsomest young
fellows that hath ever been seen"; in short, he was not unlike one
Jones, Christian-named Tom. This young man was Richard Day, student of
the law, and he had come from his silent "furnished room" to refresh
himself, at a minimum cost, at the dramatic presentation of an immortal
story of love.

On the occasions when the entertainment to be is of a superior order,
the price of admission is doubled or trebled, and the patrons of the
theatre gallery are of an exceptional character. They comprise school
teachers in abundance, miscellaneous students, matinÃ©e girls driven high
by the prohibitory prices below, young clerks, and a sprinkling from the
usual ranks of the gallery-god, the better sort of them, however, the
more wealthy and more aspiring. The original line containing Richard Day
had assembled an hour or so before time, to be on the spot at the
opening of the doors at a commendable production of "Romeo and Juliet."

There came a sudden jolting, like the coupling of railroad cars, then a
denser packing of the line, a being pushed off one's balance and being
pressed back into it again, and slowly, jerkily, the crowd began to move
forward; then swept toward the entrance. The doors had been opened. As
the throng began to move, a woman's voice rose near Day ejaculating
breathlessly, "Oh! Oh!" Simultaneously a shrill cry arose, "Oh, there's
a sick lady here! a sick lady! Oh, please! Oh, please! Won't you make
room for a sick lady!" Day with all his force made what room he could,
conceiving that the thing desired was to get the stricken lady out in
the open as quickly as possible. A little peaked woman in a light coat
took instant advantage of the slight breach then opened, impetuously to
advance herself in the line. When the momentary gap had closed again,
piteously the crying was resumed, and it continued at intervals almost
the entire distance to the box-office, though it was in a slightly
different neighborhood and observably proceeded from exactly the point
of vantage gained by the little peaked woman; who, it might be inferred,
was a dual personality, comprising in the same lady both a sick lady and
another who was her good Samaritan and assumed the care of her.

Nothing railed the crowd into a straight line on one side, though on the
other a wall held them so. The impatient crowding forward from the rear
convexed the outer edge of the line of people, much against the will of
those persons who found themselves being swept out of the direct way
and felt the main current surging past them. What was yet more agitating
to these was that ahead of them an iron railing did begin, at the foot
of some steps, fencing in a narrow approach to the ticket office. If
they should be swept past the mouth of this lane on the outside, their
chance of admittance was hopeless. Day stemmed the swerving current
himself by the strength of his body and by a kind of determined exercise
of his will. But he felt directly behind him someone less strong losing
hold with every step of advance; then suddenly this despairing someone,
realizing herself pushed quite to one side, with a little scream, caught
at his crooked arm; which he instantly, involuntarily clapped firmly
against him, hooking on in this manner and towing safely and rapidly
along someone frailer than himself. When they had come to the rail he
saw that he would get in by so narrow a margin himself that, himself
inside, he would then but tow her along outside, which of course would
be a less than useless thing for her. So he backed water, so to speak,
with all his might, bracing himself against the end of the rail, until
he had got a little space before him, around into which he drew her
whom he thought robbed of her place by the frantic selfishness of the
crowd.

But in doing this, it seemed he had inadvertently held back for a moment
the little peaked woman, who was at his inside elbow. She, finding
herself delayed for a brief period almost at the goal in her desperate
bargain-counter sort of rush for the ticket-window, blew out into a
spitting cat kind of impotent fury. "Ain't you got no semblance of
decency! you great big brute!" she screamed in his ear. "Ain't you got
no ideas of gentlemanliness at all! If I was a man I'd teach you some
shame, tramplin' on a woman, a poor weak woman! a woman!" She fairly
writhed with scorn at this depravity. Day attempted to humble himself to
her, for her pacification; but another woman's getting in ahead of her
at that instant drove her almost mad, and her frenzy interfering for the
moment with her articulation she could only glare at him with an
expression suggesting some kind of feline hydrophobia. When her breath
returned more to her command she continued to revile him as they went
along. Although Day had done nothing to merit shame, he squirmed
inwardly with something not unlike that feeling, and he blessed the
general commotion which drowned a vixen's voice. He felt ashamed, too,
to be where he was, though he had not thought of it that way before; he
should not have brought himself into a crowd more than half of women.

His reflections became rather abstract and levelled themselves somewhat
against the feminine temperament in general. He felt the littleness of
it (so he saw it), the peevishness of it; its inability to take
punishment good-naturedly; its incapacity for being a "good loser"; its
lack of the philosophic character which accepts humorously discomforts
and injustice, real as well as imagined; its lack of broadness of view;
its selfish lack of the sense of fair play; its
not-being-square-and-above-board way; its sneakiness, its deceitfulness;
the contemptible devices that it will resort to, assuming them to be its
natural weapons against a superior strength, both physical and of the
understanding. He knew that in a crowd of men if anyone of them had had
the despicable disposition of this woman his dread of the hearty,
boisterous ridicule of his fellow brutes which would inevitably have
followed his meanness would have forced him to stifle his temptation in
silence. He knew that there is no place where one may better learn to
appreciate what may be called the good-natured easy-goingness of the
male animal generally than in an uncomfortable crowd of men. He thanked
heaven he was of the superior sex. When a young man thanks heaven that
he is of the superior sex it may not be uninteresting to observe in what
manner he conducts himself subsequently.

As fast as the crowd was served with tickets it ran up the multiplied
flights of stairs, moved in single file past the ticket-chopper, then on
to come out, high up, into the vast bowl of the theatre. Here from one's
seat the impression of the weird, ship-at-sea like effect of the curves
of the galleries, balconies, and tiers of boxes, sweeping back from the
light in front, dropping away from the vaulted ceiling; the impression
of being high up close under a great roof and far from the stage; the
impression of the myriads of vague elusive faces in the half-lit, thick,
scintillating atmosphere of the hot, crowded place; the impression of
the playhouse scheme of decoration, red walls and tinsel in the dusk,
cream color and tinsel bas-relief in the highly artificial yellow light,
casting purplest shadows, and the heroic mural paintings in blue and
yellow and green, the sense of the infinite moving particles of the
throng; the sense of its all facing one way, of the low hum of it, and
of its respiration--all this is stuff that puts one in the mood for a
play. The keen actualities fade and become the shadows; sense of one's
own life and vanity and disappointment slips away; one is to enjoy a
transmigration of soul for a brief time. "Now for the play!" thought
Richard.

A man was climbing up the steps of the aisle, some distance away,
flinging an inadequate number of fluttering programs into the crowd.
None fell in Day's neighborhood, to the indignant consternation of all
there. A chorus of exclamatory sighs went up from a feminine flock just
settled at his right, all faces following the disappointing program
distributor. A stocky young man at Day's left hand arose, and clambering
out between the parallel two rows of seats, occupants getting on their
feet to allow him passage, started after the disappearing man of
programs.

A full-throated feminine voice burst almost in Day's right ear: "Oh,
please tell him to get one for us!" Day lunged after the stocky young
man, reaching for his coat-tails, and cried out, "Hey there! Hey!
Fellow! Hold on!" until it was quite hopeless to continue. The sea of
people closed in between him and his quest; the stocky young man, his
ears plugged with the multitude of voices, shook himself free from the
narow, clogged passage, and was gone. Day turned to the owner of the
feminine voice, "He will bring a lot, I think; if not I'll get you
some," he said. And he caught an elusive impression of cheeks precisely
the color of cheeks that had just been smartly slapped, suggesting the
idea that if one should press one's finger against them one's finger
would leave streaks there when taken away; and he caught an impression
of eyes that were like deep, brimming pools reflecting lights; and an
impression of a cloud of dusky brown-like hair which reminded him of a
host of rich autumn leaves. She of these cheeks and eyes and this hair
was, apparently, in a party with two companions, whose peering faces
showed indistinctly beyond her. In one significance of the word, she
might have been called a girl, or she was a young woman, a miss, a lass,
a young lady, as you please; as were they her companions. Merry
school-girl spirits lingered in them all, supplemented by the grace and
dawning dignity of young womanhood. She was at that sweet nosegay
period when young ladies are just, as it is sometimes said, finishing
their education. Her age was that enchanted time, holiest of the female
seasons, which hangs between mature girlhood and full womanhood. Day
felt a suspicion, though without perceptible foundation, that this was
the very person he had towed along outside.

The stocky young man returned presently, showing an uncommonly blunt
face and with the programs, which proved sufficient in number. There was
an interval in which to read them; then the huge place fell suddenly
much darker, except directly to the fore, which burst into great light;
the immense curtain majestically ascended, and the time was that of the
quarrels of the houses of Capulet and Montague in the sixteenth century.
Richard Day passed out of his body sitting upright on the seat and lived
in this incarnation of the master dramatist.

But unwittingly he had inhaled a liquor, that was even then feeding his
blood; he was even then continuing to inhale it; it crept in at the
pores of his right side; it was stealing its sweet breath about his
brain. This liquor was the magnetism of a powerful pleasant young
feminine presence near to him--too near. Too near for a clean-cut young
man, in his second and twentieth year, redolent of health, with
moderately cropped chestnut hair inclined to curl, intelligent forehead,
good nose, rather big mouth, full lips, and round chin with a cleft in
the centre--too near for him even to remain in the hands of the master
dramatist. A warm glow suffused him. His intellectual perception of the
illuminated, noble spectacle before him in a frame of night numbed in
his brain and he was conscious only of the rich sensation that
circulated through him. Metaphorically, senses and emotions lolled on
rich colored divans, spread with thick rugs, in the tropical atmosphere
of his head. The magically spoken lines of Shakespeare became as so much
unfelt, unrecognized, distant sounding jargon. What he had come to be
thrilled by, as the dark, breathless audience like a sea about him was
thrilled, was in a moment nothing to him. And yet he had not touched
her, nor again spoken with her, nor glanced at her.

Only she was there!




CHAPTER XIX

A HUMORIST'S NOTE-BOOK


I admit that (though, indeed, I can claim a very fair collection of
authors as acquaintances) I share the popular interest in the
idiosyncratic nature of the literary profession. I am as curious as to
the occult workings of the minds of authors, the esoteric process by
which subtle insinuations of inspiration are translated into works of
literary art, as though I had never seen an author--off a platform. I
would read the riddle of genius. I am fascinated by its impenetrable
mysteries. I would explore the recesses of the creative head.

Therefore, in the presence of the treasure of such incalculable value
which is before me, I experience tense intellectual excitement. In the
thought of its possession by myself I find the uttermost felicity. What
it is is this: it is _a humorous writer's note-book_.

I must tell you the wonderful story--how this came into my hands, and
how, romantically enough, it is, so to say, by the bequest of the author
himself, your own possession. The strange circumstances are as follows:

Something like a week ago I received through the post at my place of
residence an oblong package. It was similar in shape to an ordinary
brick; not so heavy, and somewhat larger. I had ordered nothing from a
shop, and so, as the parcel was plainly addressed to myself, I concluded
that it must contain a present. As I am very fond of presents, I was,
with much eagerness, about to open the package, when I suddenly
recollected the newspaper reports of the recent dastardly Bolshevist
bomb plots; the sending through the mails, by some apparently organized
agency, to prominent persons in all parts of the country these
skillfully disguised engines of death and destruction. They were
outwardly, I recalled, innocent looking parcels, which when opened blew
housemaids to bits, demolished dwellings and, in some instances,
accomplished the murder of the personage who had incurred the enmity of
the criminals.

I bounded some considerable distance away from the object before me.
Though, after a moment, I did, indeed, reflect that I was not what
would probably be regarded as an eminent citizen, and had never felt a
sense of power in the government of my country, I could not dissolve a
decided distaste toward my undoing this mysterious parcel. Also I did
not enjoy seeing it remain there on my table. And, further, I had no
inclination to carry it from the room.

In this dilemma it occurred to me to summon the janitor of the apartment
house where I reside. When I had explained to him that, because of my
having a sore thumb (which made it painful for me to handle things), I
wished him to open this package for me--, when I had explained this to
him, he told me that he was very much occupied at the moment mending the
boiler downstairs, and that he must hasten to this occupation, otherwise
the lower floors would shortly be flooded. And he withdrew without
further ceremony.

I sat down to consider the situation. I realized that it was a
bothersome moral responsibility--placing the lives of others (even if
janitors) in jeopardy. But something must be done; and done
soon--perhaps there was a time fuse in this thing. A thought came to me
(the buzzer of our dumb-waiter sounded at the moment); I decided to go
further down the scale in the value of human life to be risked. So I
communicated down the shaft to our iceman (one Jack) that I desired his
presence in the apartment. Well, the upshot of the matter is that Jack
showed no hesitation whatever about coolly putting the package in a pail
of water and afterward undoing it.

The parcel proved to be an ordinary cigar-box (labelled outside, in the
decorative fashion of cigar-box labels, "Angels of Commerce"); within
was a letter resting upon a note-book, and beneath that the manuscripts
of two short stories. The submersion of the box would have (most
disastrously) obliterated, or gone near to obliterating, the message of
the letter and the writing in the note-book and the manuscript, had not
(happily) these things been packed tightly into the box by surrounding
waste paper.

The letter was from Taffy Topaz, known to us all--a humorist if there
ever was one. I cannot say that I had been on intimate terms with Mr.
Topaz; indeed (to admit the truth) all my acquaintance with authors is
slight. I admire authors so much that it is the joy of my life to be
acceptable to them in any degree. I put myself in their way at every
opportunity. I regard it as a great privilege (as, certainly, it is) to
spend freely of my income in entertaining them at meals. And in this way
and that it is that I have attained the honor of hobnobbing with a
number of writers, when they are not otherwise engaged.

As I say, I had not been on intimate terms with Mr. Topaz; and so I was
no little surprised (and, I admit, no little flattered) at this decided
attention (whatever it might mean) to me. The letter was not (oh, not at
all!) a humorous letter. It was a very solemn letter. It said that Mr.
Topaz was just about to go to the war. I was, naturally, puzzled at
this: the war is (theoretically) over. I hunted round and found a piece
of the wrapping paper which had enclosed the box. On it was the postmark
(the paper had dried somewhat); and the stamp bore the date of October
1, 1917. I was still more puzzled as to where the box could have been
all this while. Then, I recollected the heroic labors of the post-office
in maintaining any kind of a schedule of delivery during the war. My
poor friend's box had been goodness knows where all this time!

The letter stated (as I have said) that Mr. Topaz was about to go to
the war--as a newspaper correspondent. It said (oh, it almost made one
weep, so solemn was it!) that he might never return from "over there."
In case he did not come back (the letter continued), he (Mr. Topaz)
wished me to undertake the charge of placing the enclosed manuscripts
with some magazine or magazines; the money got from them, though it was
inadequate he knew (so he said), he prayed that I would accept as
payment for the advances which I had made him from time to time. (Alas!
my poor friend, what were those miserable loans compared to the wealth
of his society! How I remember that proud day when he called me, so
pal-like, a "poor fish"!) But this is not a time to indulge one's grief;
I must press on with my story.

The remainder of his literary effects, he said (meaning, of course, the
note-book), he desired me (as he knew I had some connection with a
certain magazine) to present to the editor of that journal. Little more
remains to be said here of Mr. Topaz (my friend). He was not called upon
to lay down his life for his country (or his paper); after the armistice
he went valiantly into Germany; and there (as the papers have reported)
he contracted a marriage; and is little likely again to be seen in these
parts.

The first page of the note-book contains these entries. It is headed

    JOTTINGS

"Good name for a small orphan--Tommy Crandle.

"Fat person--shrugged his stomach.

"Name for a spendthrift--Charles Spending.

"Aphorism--Fear makes cowards of us all.

"Billy Sparks--Fine name for a lawyer.

"Nice name for a landlady--Mrs. Baggs.

"Humorous Christian name for a fat boy--Moscow.

"Name for a clerk--Mr. Fife.

"Good name for someone to cry out on a dark night--Peter Clue! Peter
Clue!

"Good name for a sporting character--Bob Paddock.

"Aphorism--A fool and his foot are soon in it.

"Good name for a tea room in Greenwich Village--The Bad Egg.

"Epigrammatic remark--Though somewhat down in the mouth he kept a stiff
upper lip."

       *       *       *       *       *

Then follows this on umbrellas, evidently the opening of an unwritten
essay:

    And, like umbrellas, with their feathers
    Shield you in all sorts of weathers.

                 MICHAEL DRAYTON.

"Among all the ingenious engines which man has contrived for his
ornament and protection none, certainly, is more richly idiosyncratic
than the umbrella. Literary genius has always instinctively recognized
this; and doubtless the esoteric fact has been vaguely felt even by the
unthinking; but it is a profound truth which, I fear, has had but slight
popular appreciation.

"The use of this historic and peculiarly eloquent article of personal
property, the umbrella, illustrates pictorially a proverbial allusion to
the manifestation of intelligence: it shows that a man has 'sense enough
to go in out of the rain.' It reveals not only the profundity of his
judgment but the extraordinary play of his cleverness, as it exhibits
him as the only animal who after crawling into his hole, figuratively
speaking, pulls his hole in after him, or, in other words, carries his
roof with him. Further than this, in the idea of carrying an umbrella
you find the secret of man's striking success in the world: the
intrepidity of his spirit in his tenacious pursuit of his own affairs
defies both the black cloud's downpour and the sun's hot eye."

       *       *       *       *       *

There is this, headed

    HUMOR

"There was once a man who was nearly dead from a disease. One day while
taking the air a friend cried to him encouragingly, 'Well, I see that
you're up and about again.' 'Yes,' replied the sick man good-naturedly,
'I'm able to walk the length of the block now.' This notion was so
irresistible that both the quick and the dying burst into laughter."

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the longer entries in this note-book is the following remarkable
psychological study, having as its title

    TEMPERAMENT

"That morning Kendle had seen himself famous. As he worked he began to
feel good in his brain and in his heart and in his stomach. He felt
virile, elated, full of power, and strangely happy. The joy of creating
a thing of art was upon him. Thrills ran down his spine and into his
legs. As he looked at his work he admired it. He knew that this was good
art. He felt that here was genius. He saw himself in a delectable
picture, an idol applauded of the multitude, and loved by it. For he
believed that the multitude was born, and ate and slept, and squabbled
among itself, and acquired property, and begot offspring, but to await
the arrival of genius. And the only genius he knew was genius in
eccentric painting. The only genius worth while that is, for there is a
genius that invents labor-saving machines, telephones, X-rays, and so
forth; but nobody loves that genius. It occurred to him that he was a
very lovable man, with all his faults (his faults were the lovable ones
of genius), and he would soon have achieved a distinction that would
make any woman proud of him. He determined to renew his addresses
to----.

"Somehow in the evening his intoxication had died down. He felt very
sad. His work lay before him with so little eccentricity to it that he
was ashamed. His sense of power had quite departed. And now he dismally
felt that he would never amount to anything. He was a failure. An idle,
wicked, disgraceful fellow, no good in the world, and not worth any
woman's attention. His heart felt sick when he thought this. He was very
miserable. He despised himself. So he sighed. It would have been better,
he thought, if he had apprenticed himself to the plumber's trade in his
boyhood. He would in that case have grown up happy and contented,
remained at home and done his duty, respected by his neighbors and
himself, though only a plumber. A plumber is a good honest man that pays
his debts.

"At home! Why was he not there, anyway? What good was he doing away from
there? There was his mother, in her declining years. Was his place not
by her side? He would never desert his mother, he thought. And Sis!
there was Sis. He would never desert Sis. How good they had been to him!
How they believed in him! (he squirmed) how they believed in him still.
He imagined them showing his most sensible pictures around to the
neighbors. 'My son is an artist,' he heard his mother say. His flesh
crawled. How mad he had been! How contemptible he was! Still a man was
not hopeless who had a soul for such feelings as he had now. He would
reform. He would henceforth eschew the company of such as Walker. He
enumerated his vices and renounced them one by one. He began life over
again. He would bask in the simple domestic pleasures of his mother in
her declining years, and Sis. He would get up very early every morning
and go to his humble toil before it was quite light. He felt himself
walking along in the chill of dawn--the street lamps still lit. He would
work hard all day. He would always tell the truth. Every Saturday night
he would come home tired out, with fifteen dollars in his pocket. This
he would throw into his mother's lap. 'Here, mother,' he would say in a
fine manly voice, 'here are fifteen dollars.' His mother would put her
apron to her eyes, and look at him through tears of pride and joy. He
would wear old clothes and be very honest and upright looking, the sort
of young man that Russell Sage would have approved, that Sis might
dress. He would not mind the sneers and gibes of the world, for he would
be _right_.

"He looked defiantly around the room for a few sneers and gibes."




CHAPTER XX

INCLUDING STUDIES OF TRAFFIC "COPS"


The other day it was such a pleasant April day I thought I'd take the
afternoon off. It was such a very pleasant day that I didn't want to go
anywhere in particular. Do you ever feel that way? I mean like you just
wanted to be by yourself and sit down and think awhile.

Later on, you have an idea, you'll come back into things much refreshed.
But the thought of answering these letters now, or of doing this or
doing that, kind of lets you down inside your stomach. Your brain seems
to have dropped down somewhere behind your ears. If that fellow across
the office comes over to pull another of his bright ideas on you you
think you'll probably scream, or brain him, or something. He's getting
terrible, anyhow.

You have any number of excellent friends, and (ordinarily) you are quite
fond of them. Perhaps you will go to see one of them. There's Ed, you've
been wanting for you don't know how long to go round and see him. Never
seemed to have time. But no; you don't want to see Ed--today. Same way
with all the others, as you go over the list of them in your mind.
Couldn't bear to see any of 'em--not this afternoon. For one thing,
they're all so selfish.... So interested in their own affairs.

As I was straightening up my desk an idea came to me about jobs. Seems
to me that when I have a job I'm all the while worrying about how to
break out of it. I think: Well, I'm tied up here until the first of the
year; but I'll sure shake it after that; too cramped and limited. And
then when I am out of a job I immediately begin to worry about how to
get another one. That's Life, I guess.

I turned uptown and floated along with the current of the Avenue throng.
It was a glittering April throng. The newest stockings were out. I had
not seen them before. The newest stockings (you will have noted) are so
very, very thin and the pores (so to say) in them are so large that they
give the ladies who wear them the agreeable effect of being bare-legged.

At Thirty-fourth Street the traffic policeman on post at our side of
this corner, by an outward gesture of his arms pressed back the
sidewalk stream for a couple of moments of cross-town vehicular traffic.
He stood within a few inches of the front row of the largely feminine
crush. Whenever an impatient pedestrian broke through the line he had
formed and attempted to dart across the street he emitted a peculiar
little whistle followed by the admonishment, "Hold on, lady!" or "Hey
there, mister!" Thus having returned the derelict to cover, he would
smile very intimately, with a kind of sly cuteness, at the more handsome
young women directly before him--who invariably tittered back at him.
And thus, frequently, a little conversation was started.

Now as a vigilant historian of the social scene this matter of the
gallant relations of traffic policemen to perambulating ladies of
somewhat fashionable, even patrician aspect, I find highly interesting.
It is a subject which does not seem to have been much examined into.

Why, exactly, should flowers of dÃ©butante-Bryn-Mawr appearance look with
something like tenderness at policemen? Seems to me I have read now and
then in the papers strikingly romantic stories wherein a mounted
policeman in the park (formerly a cowboy) saved the life of an
equestrienne heiress on a runaway mount, and was rewarded the next day
(or something like that) with her hand. Such a story my mind always
gladly accepts as one of the dramatic instances where life artistically
imitates the movies. Crossing Thirty-fourth Street, however, seems to me
another matter.

And what system of selection operates in the Department whereby this
officer or that is chosen from among all his brethren for the
paradisaical job of being beau of a fashionable crossing? And would you
not think that a more uniform judgment would be exercised in the
election of men to such Brummellian duties? Adonises in the traffic
force I have, indeed, seen (there is one at Forty-second Street), but
this chap of whom I have just been speaking (the whimsical whistler)
certainly was not one of them. He was what is called "pie-faced."
Hunched up his shoulders like an owl. Yet his ogling of loveliness in
new spring attire was completely successful, was in no instance that I
observed resented, was received with arch merriment. Indeed, his heavy,
pink-tea attentions were obviously regarded as quite flattering by the
fair recipients! As he let the tide break to cross the street it was
plain, from bright glances backward, that he had fluttered little hearts
which would smile upon him again. And so, in such a Romeo-like manner,
does this bulky sentimentalist, armed with concealed weapons, have
dalliance with the passing days. What you 'spose it is about him gives
him his fascination in flashing eyes haughty to the rest of the
masculine world--his bright buttons, or what?

Yes; these curious and romantic little relationships between traffic
cops on social duty, so to say, and their dainty admirers are not (in
some instances at least) so transient as to be merely the exchange of
roguish words and soft glances of the moment. There is that really
august being of matinee-idol figure at--well, let us say at Forty-second
Street. Sir Walter Raleigh could not with more courtliness pilot his
fair freight across the Avenue. So it was the day after Christmas I saw
not one but several of his young friends blushingly put dainty packages
into his hands.

Is there not an excellent O. Henry sort of story in this piquant city
situation?

Well, floating like a cork upon a river I drifted along up the Avenue. I
passed a man I had not seen for several years. Yes; that certainly was
the fellow I used to know. And yet he was an altogether different being
now, too. The sort of a shock I got has perhaps also been experienced by
you. Only a short time ago, it seemed to me, this friend of mine had
been robust and ruddy, masterful and gay, in the prime of his years. I
had somehow innocently expected him always to be so. Just as I find it
very unreal to think of myself in any other way than I am now. Don't
you? As to yourself, I mean. He was quite grey. His shoulders hung
forward. His chest seemed to have fallen in on itself. His legs moved
back and forth without ever altogether straightening out. He had a
whipped look. Wrinkled clothes and dusty black derby hat, he was
conspicuous in the peacockean scene. And yet on a time he had been, I
knew, as much a conqueror of hearts as any policeman. So would it
sometime be with me--like this?

What do you know about that! In the next block another acquaintance of
old I saw. But when I had known him he was stooped and little and thin
and dried up and cringing. He worked in a basement and did not wear a
collar, at least by day. He used to look very old. Now here he was
swinging along looking very much like Mr. Caruso, or some such personage
as that.

How may this phenomenon be accounted for, what was the misfortune of one
of these persons and the secret of the other? I know a man who has a
theory which, at least, sounds all right. It is not buttermilk nor
monkey glands, he contends, which will keep a man young and stalwart so
much as (what he calls) an objective in life--a distant rampart to take,
a golden fleece to pursue. That is why, he declares, scientists and
artists frequently live happy and alert to such a great age: Thomas A.
Edison, Leonardo Da Vinci and the Jap chap (what's his name? Hokusai)
who at a hundred and ten or thereabout was called "the old man mad about
painting."

Maybe it was thinking of that idea, maybe it was the fearsome thought of
that dusty derby hat of my friend's which haunted my mind, or maybe my
competitive instincts had been aroused from spring slumber by the
spectacle of my Caruso-like friend careering along, anyhow a decidedly
bugged-up feeling began to flow through me; I wavered in my loitering, I
turned, my sails (so to speak) caught the wind, and I laid my course
abruptly back to the office. I had suddenly a great itch to get at all
those letters.

I was very glad to see that fellow across the office from me. He is a
good fellow and very helpful. I said to him, "Look here, what do you
think about this idea for getting business?"

"Oh, my goodness!" he said; "it's altogether too fine a day to think
about work. I'd just like to go out and wander up the Avenue with
nothing on my mind but my hair."




CHAPTER XXI

THREE WORDS ABOUT LITERATURE


A friend of mine (and aside from this error a very fine friend he is,
too) not long ago published a book which he declared, in his Preface,
should be read in bed. He insisted, to such an extent was he the victim
of a remarkable and pernicious fallacy which I find here and there, that
this book could not otherwise be properly enjoyed.

Now the difficulty about this particular book, that is the circumstance
wherein my friend has got me in a position where it is not so easy for
me to overturn him all at once, is this: one, not knowing any better,
might take the author's advice, and find pleasure reading the book in
bed, not being aware that this simply was because here was a book that
one would find pleasure in reading anywhere. But because you have got
hold of a book which it is possible to enjoy reading in the wrong way,
it naturally follows (does it not?) that you'd enjoy it much more
reading it in the right way. That, I should say, was simple and logical
enough.

I know, I know! I'm coming to that: there are plenty of other people who
have this ridiculous reading-in-bed idea. There, for instance, is
Richard Le Gallienne. I had a letter from him awhile ago, in which he
remarked that it was his practice to do most of his reading in bed. Then
I had a letter recently from Meredith Nicholson, in which there was some
such absurd phrase as "going to bed and reading until the cock crows."
Also I one time read an essay, a very pleasant essay outside the
mistaken notion of its main theme, by Michael Monahan, which was largely
about the pleasure of reading in bed. Spoke of the delights of being
tucked in, with what satisfaction you got the light just right, and all
that.

It must, of course, be acknowledged that all these gentlemen are, if
perverse in their method, persons of some reading. However, a fact such
as that, an accident as you might say, cannot be permitted to upset the
course of a profound argument. Why! as to that, a suspicion just occurs
to me that maybe someone could dig up Lamb, Hazlitt, Mark Twain,
Coleridge, Leigh Hunt, Cowper (perhaps all of them, and more) to the
effect that it is pleasant to read in bed. Didn't Thackeray have some
nonsense about "bedside books"? _I_ haven't time to refute each of these
persons separately. It is sufficient, I take it, to roll into one point
of attack all this bed-reading heresy, from whatever quarters it comes,
and put an end to that.

Understand me; I have no complaint against the reading in bed of persons
confined there through physical disability. The world war which brought
more people to bed for indefinite periods than any other matter since
time began thereby probably got more souls into the way of reading than
seventeen times several hundred schools ever did. All of them, however,
would find that they were much better off in the matter of reading when
they had got out of bed. What I say is that, in a manner of speaking,
there is no use in taking the air in a wheel-chair if you can take it on
horseback. Why do a thing in a halfway fashion when you can go to it
right?

Another thing. There are people (I've seen them at it) who read on
porches. Sometimes in swings, rocking to and fro. Even in hammocks,
slung above the ground from trees. On trains, too. I have (with my own
ears) heard people say that they would "take a book" and go out into the
park, or into the woods, or out in a boat, or up on the mountain, or by
the sea, or any conceivable place except where one should go to read.

All of these ways of reading are worse, if anything can be worse than
that, than reading in bed. Because in bed you do, at least, have your
mind sandwiched within doors. You do not feel the surge and rumble of
the world--the sound and movement of the things of which literature is
made; but any contact with which (at the moment of reading) is
destructive to the illusion which it is the province of literature to
create.

For literature (reading it, I mean here) is, in this, like love: Richest
are the returns to that one whose passion is most complete in its
surrender. And a man lapping his frame in soft indolence, though he have
a book in his hand, is indulging in sensuous physical pleasure at least
equally with intellectual receptivity or aesthetic appreciation. No.
Reading should not be taken as an opiate.

The way to read, then--but, a moment more; a couple of other points are
to be cleared up. There is much babble of slippers and dressing-gowns,
easy chairs and "soft lights" in connection with the comments about the
pleasures, the "delights" as I believe some people say, of reading.

What is wanted to _know_ the relish to be got from reading is, first (of
course), an uncommon book. And by that term is meant merely one
uncommonly suited to the spirit of the reader. (The only perfect
definition, that, of a "good book.") Some people still read Stevenson.
Well, there's no great harm in that. Providing you read him (or anybody
else) as follows:

You should read as you should die--with your boots on. You take a wooden
chair, without arms, such (this is the best) as is commonly called a
"kitchen chair." It has a good, hard seat. You sit upright in this,
crossing and recrossing your legs as they tire. Nearby you is a good,
strong light, one with a tonic effect, a light that keeps your eyes wide
open. You sit facing a dull, blank wall. No pictures or other ornaments
or decorations should be on this wall, as, in case such things are
there, and you happen to raise your eyes for an instant, in ecstasy or
in thought, your vision lights upon one of these things; and the heart
which you have given your author is, certainly in some measure,
alienated from him. Maybe, indeed, you go back to him almost at once.
But then harm has been done--you have not read with supreme abandon.




CHAPTER XXII

RECOLLECTIONS OF LANDLADIES


There is no figure in the human scene which makes so unctuous an appeal
to our relish of humanity as the landlady. When the landlady comes upon
the stage at the theatre, we all awaken to an expectation of delight in
the characteristic manifestations of her nature, and seldom are
disappointed. The genius of the greatest of authors always unfolds with
particular warmth in the presence of their landladies. A moment's
reflection will recall a procession of immortal landladies. Whether it
is that the colorful calling of landlady cultivates in one a peculiar
richness of human nature, or whether landladies are born and not
made--those with characters of especial tang and savor instinctively
adopting this occupation,--I cannot say, but the fact is indisputable
that landladies are not as other persons are. No one ever saw a humdrum
landlady. A commonplace person as a landlady is unthinkable.

Now I think I may say that all my life, or nearly all, I have been an
eager and earnest student of landladies. I am, indeed, much more
familiar with the genus landlady than with courts and kings, or with
eminent personages generally such as supply the material for most of
those who write their recollections. Thus I am competent, I think, to
speak on a subject curiously neglected by the memorist.

One who makes a culture of landladies comes in time to have a flair for
these racy beings, and is drawn by a happy intuition to the habitats of
those most resplendent in the qualities of their kind. Of course, one
never can tell what life will bring forth, but it seems to me that my
present landlady marks the top of my career as a connoisseur, an
amateur, of landladies. She is strikingly reminiscent of an English
landlady. And England, particularly London, is, as all the world knows,
to the devotee of landladies what Africa is to the big game
sportsman--his paradise. There the species comes to luxuriant flower, so
that to possess with the mind one or two well-developed London
landladies is never to be without food for entertainment. My present
landlady, to return, is of course a widow. While it may be, for aught I
know, that all widows are not landladies, with very few exceptions all
landladies worthy of the name are widows. Those who are not widows
outright are, as you might say, widows in a sense. That is, while their
husbands may accurately be spoken of as living, and indeed are visible,
they do not exist in the normal rÃ´le of husband. The commercial impulses
of the bona-fide husband have died in them, generally through their
attachment to alcoholic liquor, and they become satellites, hewers of
wood and drawers of water, to the genius awakened by circumstances in
their wives.

I one time had a landlady of this origin in Norwalk, Connecticut. She
was a woman of angular frame, with a face of flint, a tongue of vinegar,
and a heart of gold. This, I have found in my travels, is the type of
the semi-widowed landlady. I had another such an identical one in
Topeka, Kansas. The asperity, doubtless, is occasioned by biting
disillusionment in the romance of long ago, but it is external; frost on
the window; at the heart's core wells the sense of universe-embracing
maternity which makes the character of the landlady by vocation
sublime. All semi-widowed landladies have (it is their divine
inspiration) large families of half-grown sons. My landlady of Norwalk
grumbled continually; she could be heard out in the kitchen complaining
in a shrill, querulous tone that, with things as high as they were,
people would be crazy to expect meat twice a day. Yet she had at her
board the meanest, most low-down, ornery, contemptible, despicable cuss
in human form I ever knew, and the only fault I ever heard her find with
him was that he didn't eat enough.

The erudite in landladies have, of course, cognizance of a class which
are in no degree widows. Those of this department of the race, however,
frequently are not landladies in fibre, but merely incidentally. They
are young wives who for a transient period seek to help out in the
domestic economy by taking a few lodgers who come with unexceptionable
references. As wives doubtless they are meritorious; but no monument
need be erected to them as landladies. Though I should like to see in
the principal public square of every town and city a monument designed
by an artist of ability placed to the enduring glory of the landladies
of that place. For are not landladies ancient institutions fostering
the public weal, and in their field not a whit less deserving of homage
than governors and soldiers? I would say to a nation, show me your
landladies and I will tell you your destiny. I should be remiss,
however, in my chronicle did I not note that among these partial and
ephemeral landladies occasionally are to be found pronounced landlady
potentialities. I recall a landlady I had on Montague Street, Brooklyn
Heights, whose passion for cleaning amounted to a mania. This young
person's housewifery frenzy always put me in mind of another soul who
could not rest--Hokusai, who at about a hundred and ten was spoken of as
"the old man mad about painting."

Hovering about, tortured by a desire to begin, when I left for my
breakfast, she was still at it upon my return from my morning stroll, my
door barricaded by articles of dismembered furniture; still at it when I
came back a bit impatiently from a second walk; still at it while I read
the paper in her dining-room. And so without surcease throughout the
march of days and seasons. She unscrewed the knobs of the bed to polish
the threads thereof; she removed penpoints from penholders and made them
to shine like burnished gold. I had another landlady moved by the same
springs of feeling, on Spruce Street, Philadelphia. Later, I heard, her
husband died, and she espoused her latent career.

There is in the galaxy of landladies quite another type, an exotic plant
in the wondrously competent sisterhood, specimens of which may be found
blooming here and there like some rare orchid. I mean the fragile, lady
landlady, the clinging vine bereft of the supporting husband oak. Such
was Mrs. Knoll, of Central Avenue, Indianapolis, a little, plump,
rounded body, exceedingly bright, pleasant, intelligent, amiable, and
helpless; all of which qualities shone from her very agreeable face and
person. In her youth no doubt she was a type of beauty, and she remained
very well preserved. "Life and vanity and disappointment had slipped
away" (in the Thackerian words) from Dr. Knoll some years before; and
his widow and only child, Miss Knoll, were left in possession of the old
family home, and nothing more. They could not bear to leave it, that
would "break their hearts," said good, ineffectual Mrs. Knoll; so it was
viewed by them, unfortunately somewhat fallaciously, in the light of a
possible support.

The Doctor evidently was a man of books, and his widow had sought, more
and more, companionship in reading. Life--the actual world about her,
that is--, and vanity, but not disappointment, had, in a manner of
speaking, slipped from her, too. And she had turned to that great world
of shadows. "In books," she said, "I can choose my own company." She had
plighted her troth in youth to Dickens and to Thackeray, and to these
she had remained ever faithful. In a world of false books and unsafe
friends she knew that she had by the hand two true spirits. Jane Austen
she loaned me with tremulous pleasure. And she was very fond of Mr.
Howells, with whom, she said she lived a great deal; and the Kentons,
the Laphams, and the Marches, were characters better known to her "than
her next-door neighbors." But it must be confessed that the tender
perfume of Mrs. Knoll was not altogether an equivalent in the sphere of
her passive efforts to the homely vegetable odor of the authentic
landlady.

In great cities, amid the sheen of civilization is to be found just
adjacent to smart quarters of the town the tulip in the variegated
garden of landladies--the finished, polished stone gathered from the
mine, the bird of plumage of the species; I mean, of course, the
landlady _du beau monde_, the modish landlady, or perhaps I should say,
the professional hostess, as it were. For it seems rather vulgar, a
thing repellent to the finer sensibilities, to touch this distinguished
figure of immaculate artificiality with the plebeian term of "landlady."
The personages of this type are, so to say, of the peerage of their
order. Such a Lady Drew it was whose guest I became for a time on
Madison Avenue, New York. With silvered hair like a powdered coiffure;
softly tinted with the delicate enamel of cosmetic; rich and stately of
corsage--this expensive and highly sophisticated presence presided, in
the subdued tone of the best society, over the nicely adjusted machinery
of her smart establishment by the authority of a consciousness of highly
cultivated efficiency and an aroma of unexceptionable standards.

This consummate hostess type of landlady is, of course, one which the
passionate collector will preserve in the cabinet of his mind with
tremulous happiness in the sheer preciosity of it. I cannot but feel,
however, myself, that this type fails of complete perfection as a work
of art in this: that in every work of the first genius, it cannot be
denied, there is always a strain of coarseness. And perhaps I should
confess that my own taste in landladies, though I hope it is not
undiscriminating, leans a bit toward the popular taste, the relish of
the Rabelaisian.

Stevenson has observed that most men of high destinies have even
high-sounding names. And anyone who has reflected at all upon the
phenomenon of landladies must have been struck by the singularly
idiosyncratic character of their names. Indeed, an infallible way to
pick out a competent landlady from an advertisement is by her name. Is
it a happy name for a landlady? Go there! As her name is, so is her
nature. I one time had a landlady on Broome Street, New York, whom the
gods named Mrs. Brew. I one time had a landlady (in Milligan Place,
Manhattan) of the name of Mrs. Boggs. One time I had a landlady just off
the East India Dock Road, London, whose name was Wigger. I shall always
cherish the memory of the landlady I had down in Surrey, Mrs. Cheeseman.
One and all, these ladies, as landladies, were without stain.

Regarded as a bibelot, Mrs. Wigger was, I think, of the first
perfection. In her own genre, so to say, she was as finished, as
impossible of improvement, as an Elgin marble, a Grecian urn, a bit of
Chinese blue and white, a fan of old Japan, a Vermeer, a Whistler
symphony, a caricature by Max Beerbohm. She was of massive mould and
very individually shapen. Her face was very large and very red and
heavily pock-marked. In her bizarre garments, in some indefinable way
she imparted to the character of the born slattern something of the
Grand Style. Her utterance was quavered in a weird, cracked voice, which
had somewhat an effect as of the wind crying high aloft in a ship's
rigging. She slipslod about, always a bit unsteadily. Her movements and
her manner generally, I felt, made it not unreasonable to suppose that
she had in secret certain habits no longer widely approved by society.
The apple of her eye was an unkempt parrot which spent its days in
vainly attempting to ascend the embracing sides of a tin bathtub.

Landladies, beyond all other persons, have the esoteric power of
becoming for one the geniuses of places. It would, for instance, be
quite impossible for anyone to visualize my Mrs. Cheeseman torn from, as
you might say her context. If you were asked to describe Mrs. Cheeseman
you would naturally do it in this way: You would say, "Well, I wonder
what has become of the sweetest, quaintest, fairest old inn in all
England!" And into your mind would come a rapid cinematograph picture:

A highway winding out of Dorking, stretching its way between hills to
the sea. You round a turn and see before you long, low, glistening white
stables--the stables, evidently, of a coaching inn. And presently you
come into view of an ancient, white, stone building with a "Sussex
roof." From a tall post before the door swings the board of the "King's
Head." White ducks ride in a pond at the roadside there. Round this inn
which you are approaching is the greenest, handsomest hedge ever seen.
And along the road beyond you perceive the cottages of a wee village.

"We know that all things work together for good to them that love God."
The romance of destiny which in its inscrutable way has been leading you
all your long life long to the bosom, if I may so put it, of Mrs.
Cheeseman, reveals its beneficence now by carefully graduated steps. At
the other side of the main bulk of the "King's Head," which it was given
you first to see, you come upon a delicious little flagged yard leading
to another arm of the house, older still, very venerable, with a high
roof low descending, a roof which tucks under its projecting wing many
oddly placed little latticed windows gayly sporting innumerable tiny
panes. Like a miniature cathedral spire, a tall, quaint chimney stands
sentinel at one corner, and several chimney-pots peep over the roof's
dark crown.

Up this little yard, bounded on one side by a multicolored flower garden
whose fragrance bathes you in a softening vapor of perfume, you enter,
by a door which requires you to stoop, the wee taproom. Here: a
cavernous fireplace, settles are within against its sides, a gigantic
blackened crane swung across its middle, and a cubby-hole of a window at
its back. Above it is swung an ancient fowling-piece. The stone floor of
the room, like the ancient flags without, is worn into dips and hollows.
Along the window-sill of an oblong window measuring one wall is a bright
parade of potted plants.

It is impossible to avoid the conclusion that there is something psychic
about landladies. As you look about you at the environment in which you
find yourself, you experience a premonition that you are nearing an
affinity in the landlady world. It is strange, too, that there are
places where you have never been before (in the life which you
consciously remember) that give you at once completely the feeling of
your having arrived at the home familiar to your spirit. And there
presently occurs here an event in your career predetermined (I doubt
not) Ã¦ons and Ã¦ons ago. A buxom body with the most glorious complexion
(you ween) in all England--which is to say in the world--enters the
ancient room: a lass whose rosy, honest, pedestrian face and bursting
figure are to become forever more for you the connotation of the name
"Maggie." The daughter, this, (you later learn) of your Mrs. Cheeseman.

Soon it is all arranged, and you are having your tea--a "meat tea"--in
the sitting-room of the "King's Head," your sitting-room now. A bucolic
slavey--a person whose cheerful simpleness is like to that of the little
creatures of the field--attends you. In this commodious apartment of
yours is a great scintillation of chintz; flowers, in pots and vases,
everywhere caress the eye; and the fancy is kindled by the spectacle of
many stuffed birds in glass cases. On the heavily flowered wall hangs a
handsome specimen of the "glass" (invariably found in England) for
forecasting the weather; a "pianoforte," as piquantly old-fashioned as a
cocked hat, crosses one end wall; and venerable paintings (which time
has mellowed to the richness and the general color effect of an old plug
of tobacco), bright sporting prints, and antique oddities of furniture
to an extent that it would require a catalogue to name, all combine to
give an air of true sitting-room opulence to the chamber.

But of landladies, and the connotations of landladies, one could write a
book of several volumes; and it being a very fair day, and a Sunday, and
the first cool breath after a very hot summer, I do not think I shall
write those volumes this afternoon; I shall go out for a bit of air and
a look at the world.




CHAPTER XXIII

AN IDIOSYNCRASY


Then there's the matter of these dedications. Several weeks ago I
received a communication. I think it was sent by Miss Katherine Lord, or
maybe it was Hamlin Garland. Anyhow, it was an invitation. The upshot of
this invitation was that the annual exhibit of the "best books of the
year" held at the National Arts Club, New York City, under the auspices
of the Joint Committee of Literary Arts was now going--or was just about
to go. Further, it was conveyed that the opening evening of the exhibit
would be devoted to a reception for the authors of the books exhibited.
Also, that on this evening speeches would be made by a number of
distinguished persons acquainted with this matter on the subject of the
idiosyncrasies of authors and editors. Further than this, this
invitation made clear beyond all manner of reasonable doubt that the
pleasure of the evening would be generally felt to be sadly incomplete
without the presence there among the speakers of myself.

The reasons why I was (I am sorry to say) unable to rise to this
occasion were two. For one thing, I have known long and intimately a
considerable number of authors and editors. Also, I have had the honor
of having been several times to the National Arts Club. And (such is my
tact and delicacy) I could not feel that this was any fit place for me
to discuss the (as the term is) idiosyncrasies with which a decidedly
checkered career has acquainted me. Then, as to one of my own
idiosyncrasies: I am like George Moore in this which he says, that he is
"the only Irishman living or dead who cannot make a speech"--except that
I am not an Irishman.

All of this, however, is merely picking up the threads of my thought.
What I have in my eye is an idiosyncrasy of authors which doubtless I
could have discussed with some propriety. That is, if I were able to
discuss before an audience anything at all. Though with this subject, as
many of those present were authors (who had their toes along with them)
I should have had to exercise more than a little caution, and
considerable skill in maintaining a honeyed amiability. Maybe this
theme wouldn't have done at all either.

You see, it's this way: Many people, I believe, do not read the
introductions, prefaces, forewords (and whatever else such things are
called) to books. I always do. Perhaps this is a habit formed during a
number of years spent as a professional reviewer. If you read the
introduction, preface (or whatever it's called), to a book you can
generally pick up pretty much what the author thought he was about when
he wrote it, the points he intended to make in the work, the
circumstances in which he wrote it, and so on. This is a great time and
labor saving procedure. All you've got to do then is to read a bit in
the volume here and there to taste the style, pick up a few errors of
fact or grammar, glance at the "conclusion," where the author sums up,
to see whether or not he got anywhere--and so far as you are further put
out by having this book on your hands it might just as well never have
been written. But I am drifting. That's one reason I can't make a
speech. Never can recollect what it was I set out to say.

Oh, yes! About these dedications. Less people than read prefaces, I
fancy, read the dedications of books. I always read 'em. I read them
when I have no intention whatever of reading the volumes which
they--well, dedicate. They are fine--dedications. Better, far better,
than old tombstones. But never judge a book by its dedication.

I one time knew a man, of a most decidedly humorous cast of mind, who
was a great spendthrift, an A 1 wastrel. He ran through everything his
father left him (a very fair little fortune), and then when he had run
through, in advance of that gentleman's death, everything his wife was
to inherit from his father-in-law he had no means whatever. He had a
daughter. Without, it was clearly evident, the least suspicion of the
pleasant humor of this, he named her Hope. She was a small child.
And--it's absurd, I know; but 'tis so; there was not a particle of
conscious irony in it; this child's name was the one blind spot in her
father's sense of the ridiculous--her parents frequently referred to her
affectionately as "little Hope."

So, quite so, with dedications. Whenever, or perhaps we had better say
frequently, when a man writes a particularly worthless book he lays the
deed (in his dedication of it) onto his wife, "without whose constant
devotion," etc., etc., etc., "this work would never have come into
being." Amen! Or he says that it is inscribed "To--my gentlest
friend--and severest critic--my aged Grandmother." Or maybe he accuses
his little daughter, "whose tiny hands have led me." Again he may say
benignantly: "To--my faithful friend--Murray Hill--who made possible
this volume"; or "the illumination of whose personality has lighted my
way to truth."

Doubtless he means well, this author. And, in most cases, highly
probable it is that his magnanimous sentiments are O. K. all round. For
to the minds of what would probably be called "right-thinking" persons
is not having a book dedicated to you the equivalent, almost, of having
a career yourself? I know a very distinguished American novelist--well,
I'll tell you who he is: Booth Tarkington--who has told me this: Time
and again he has been relentlessly pursued by some person unknown to him
who, in the belief that did he once hear it he would surely use it as
material for his next book, wished to tell him the story of his life.
This life, according to the communications received by the novelist,
was in every case one of the most remarkable ever lived by man. It was,
in every case, most extraordinary in, among a variety of other singular
things, this: the abounding in it of the most amazing coincidences. And
so on, and so on, and so on. One of these romantic personages nailed the
novelist somewhere coming out of a doorway one day, and contrived to
compel him to sit down and listen to the life story. He was an old, old
man, this chap, and firmly convinced that the tale of his many days (as
simple, commonplace, dull and monotonous an existence as ever was
conceived) was unique. Now he did not want any pay for telling his
story; he had no design on any royalty to come from the great book to be
made out of it; no, not at all. All he asked--and that, he thought, was
fair enough--was that the book be dedicated to him. And so it was with
them all, all of those with the remarkable, obscure, romantic, humdrum
lives. So much for that.

Dedications run the whole gamut of the emotions. A type of author very
tonic to the spirit is that one whose soul embraces not merely an
individual but which enfolds in its heroic sweep a nation, a people, or
some mighty idea. What, for instance, could be more vast in the
grandeur of its sweep than this--which I came upon the other day in a
modest little volume? "To the Children of Destiny." The Great War, which
has wrought so much evil and inspired so much literature, is responsible
for a flood of noble, lofty dedications. The merest snooping through a
bunch of recent war books turns up, among a multitude more, the
following: "To the Mothers of America." "To--the Loyalty and
Patriotism--of the--American People." "To the Hour--When the Troops Turn
Home." "To All the Men at the Front."

I should not affirm, of course, that there is anything new under the
sun. And it is very probable that ever since this psychic literature
began (whenever it began) authors resident beyond the stars have,
naturally enough, dedicated their manuscripts submitted to earthly
publishers to folks back in the old home, so to say. But with the War,
which has so greatly stimulated literary activity on the other side of
life, the dedications of these (to put it so) expatriated authors have
perhaps become (in a manner of speaking) loftier in tone than ever
before. As a sample of the present state of exalted feeling of authors
of this sort I copy the following dedication from the recently published
book of a writer "gone West": "To the heroic women of the world, the
mothers, wives and sweethearts who bravely sent us forth to battle for a
great cause:--we who have crossed the Great Divide salute you."

I wish, I do wish, I had at hand a book which I saw a number of years
ago.... As examples of persons to whom books have been dedicated may be
specified The Deity, The Virgin Mary, Royalty and Dignitaries of Church
and State, "The Reader," and the author himself. Many of the pleasantest
dedications have been to children. Besides armies and navies, countries,
states, cities and their inhabitants, books have also been dedicated to
institutions and societies, to animals, to things spiritual, and to
things inanimate. An attractive example of a dedication to Deity is
furnished by one John Leycaeter, who, in 1649, dedicated his "Civill
Warres of England, Briefly Related from his Majesties First Setting Up
his Standard, 1641, to this Present Personall Hopefull Treaty"--"To the
Honour and Glory of the Infinite, Immense, and Incomprehensible Majesty
of Jehovah, the Fountaine of all Excellencies, the Lord of Hosts, the
Giver of all Victories, and the God of Peace." He continued in a poem,
"By J. O. Ley, a small crumme of mortality."

But about that book I saw some time ago. You, of course, remember that
prayer in "Tom Sawyer" (or somewhere else in Mark Twain) where the
great-hearted minister called upon the Lord to bless the President of
the United States, the President's Cabinet, the Senate of the United
States, the governors of each of the states, and their legislatures, the
mayors of all the cities, and all the towns, of the United States, and
the inhabitants--grandmothers and grandfathers, mothers and wives,
husbands and fathers, sons and daughters, bachelors and little
children--of every hamlet, town and city of the United States, also of
all the countryside thereof. Well, this book of which I am
speaking,--this minister in the august range and compass of his prayer
had nothing on its dedication. It was published, as I recollect, by the
author; printed on very woody wood-pulp paper by a job press, and had a
coarse screen frontispiece portrait of the author, whose name has long
since left me. What it was about I do not remember. That is a little
matter. It lives in my mind, and should live in the memory of the
world, by its dedication; which, I recall, in part was: "To the Sultan
of Turkey--the Emperor of Japan--the Czar of Russia--the Emperor of
Germany--the President of France--the King of England--the President of
the United States--and to God."

But it was in an elder day that they really knew how to write sonorous
dedications. If I should write a book (and the idea of having one to
dedicate tempts me greatly) I'd pick out some important personage, such
as Benjamin De Casseres, or Frank Crowinshield, or Charles Hanson Towne,
or somebody like that. Then I would take as the model for my dedication
that one, say, of Boswell's to Sir Joshua Reynolds. I am afraid you have
not read it lately. And so, for the joy the meeting of it again will
give you, I will copy it out. It goes as follows:

     My Dear Sir,--Every liberal motive that can actuate an Authour in
     the dedication of his labours, concurs in directing me to you, as
     the person to whom the following Work should be inscribed.

     If there be a pleasure in celebrating the distinguished merit of a
     contemporary, mixed with a certain degree of vanity not altogether
     inexcusable, in appearing fully sensible of it, where can I find
     one, in complimenting whom I can with more general approbation
     gratify those feelings? Your excellence not only in the Art over
     which you have long presided with unrivalled fame, but also in
     Philosophy and elegant Literature, is well known to the present,
     and will continue to be the admiration of future ages. Your equal
     and placid temper, your variety of conversation, your true
     politeness, by which you are so amiable in private society, and
     that enlarged hospitality which has long made your house a common
     centre of union for the great and accomplished, the learned, and
     the ingenious; all these qualities I can, in perfect confidence of
     not being accused of flattery, ascribe to you.

     If a man may indulge an honest pride, in having it known to the
     world, that he has been thought worthy of particular attention by a
     person of the first eminence in the age in which he lived, whose
     company has been universally courted, I am justified in availing
     myself of the usual privilege of a Dedication, when I mention that
     there has been a long and uninterrupted friendship between us.

     If gratitude should be acknowledged for favours received, I have
     this opportunity, my dear Sir, most sincerely to thank you for the
     many happy hours which I owe to your kindness,--for the cordiality
     with which you have at all times been pleased to welcome me,--for
     the number of valuable acquaintances to whom you have introduced
     me,--for the _noctes cÃ¦nÃ¦que DeÃ»m_, which I have enjoyed under your
     roof.

     If a work should be inscribed to one who is master of the subject
     of it, and whose approbation, therefore, must ensure it credit and
     success, the Life of Dr. Johnson is, with the greatest propriety,
     dedicated to Sir Joshua Reynolds, who was the intimate and beloved
     friend of that great man; the friend, whom he declared to be "the
     most invulnerable man he knew; whom, if he should quarrel with him,
     he should find the most difficulty how to abuse." You, my dear Sir,
     studied him, and knew him well: you venerated and admired him. Yet,
     luminous as he was upon the whole, you perceived all the shades
     which mingled in the grand composition; all the peculiarities and
     slight blemishes which marked the literary Colossus. Your very warm
     commendation of the specimen which I gave in my "Journal of a Tour
     to the Hebrides," of my being able to preserve his conversation in
     an authentik and lively manner, which opinion the Publik has
     confirmed, was the best encouragement for me to persevere in my
     purpose of producing the whole of my stores....

       I am, my dear Sir,
          Your much obliged friend,
               And faithful humble servant,
    London, April 20, 1791.
                          JAMES BOSWELL.


       *       *       *       *       *

In a more modern style of composition the epistolary form of dedication
is still employed. I wish I had not (one time when I was moving) lost
that copy I had, English edition, of George Moore's book "The Lake." I
have a feeling that the dedicatory letter there, in French, was an
admirable example of its kind of thing. If you happen to have a copy of
the book, why don't you look it up?

When poems are written as dedications an established convention is
followed. You affect at the beginning (in this formula) to be very
humble in spirit, deeply modest in your conception of your powers. You
speak, if your book is verse, of your "fragile rhyme," or (with Patmore)
you "drag a rumbling wain." Again perhaps you speak (in the words of
Burns) of your "wee bit heap o' leaves an' stibble," or you call
Southwell to witness that:

    He that high growth on cedars did bestow,
    Gave also lowly mushrumps leave to grow.

And so on. At any rate, you always do this. Then you say that his (or
her) eyes for whom the book was written will change the dross to gold,
the "blind words" to "authentic song," the "mushrump" to a flower, or
some such thing. So, after all, you skillfully contrive to leave your
book to the reader on a rather high, confident note. Any other way of
writing a dedicatory poem to a book of verse (being out of the tradition
altogether) is, I take it, bad, very bad, literary etiquette.

Numerous dedications have considerable fame. There is that enigmatical
one to "Mr. W. H.," prefixed by Thomas Thorpe, bookseller of London, to
Shakespeare's Sonnets. And Dr. Johnson's scathing definition of a patron
when Lord Chesterfield fell short of Johnson's expectations in the
amount which he contributed to the publication of the famous dictionary
men will not willingly let die. Another celebrated dedication is that of
"The Gentle Art of Making Enemies"--"To the Rare Few, who, early in
life, have rid themselves of the Friendship of the Many." Laurence
Sterne's solemn "putting up fairly to public sale" to an imaginary lord
a dedication to "Tristram Shandy" is not without merit. John Burroughs
was felicitous in his dedication of "Bird and Bough"--"To the kinglet
that sang in my evergreens in October and made me think it was May." And
a very amiable dedication prefixed to "The Bashful Earthquake," by
Oliver Herford, illustrated by the author, is this: "To the Illustrator,
in grateful acknowledgment of his amiable condescension in lending his
exquisite and delicate art to the embellishment of these poor verses,
from his sincerest admirer, The Author." Mr. Herford's latest book (at
the time of this writing), "This Giddy Globe," is dedicated so: "To
President Wilson (With all his faults he quotes me still)."

A clever dedication, I think, is that of Christopher Morley's
"Shandygaff"--"To The Miehle Printing Press--More Sinned Against Than
Sinning." A dedication intended to be clever, and one frequently seen,
is, in effect, "To the Hesitating Purchaser." A certain appropriateness
is presented in a recent book on advertising, "Respectfully dedicated to
the men who invest millions of dollars a year in national advertising."
And some nimbleness of wit is attained in the inscription of the book
"Why Worry"--"To my long-suffering family and circle of friends, whose
patience has been tried by my efforts to eliminate worry, this book is
affectionately dedicated." As cheerful a dedication as I have come
across is that prefixed by Francis Hackett to his volume "The Invisible
Censor"; it is: "To My Wife--Signe Toksvig--whose lack of interest--in
this book has been my--constant desperation."

Miss Annie Carroll Moore, supervisor of work with children at the New
York Public Library, tells me that the other day a small boy inquired,
"Who was the first man to write a book to another man?" I'm sure I don't
know. Perhaps this is told somewhere. A number of books and articles
concerning dedications, I have heard, are to be found in studious
places. I have never read any of them. I remember, however, reviewing
for a newspaper a number of years ago (I think it was in 1913) a book,
then just published, called "Dedications: An Anthology of the Forms Used
from the Earliest Days of Bookmaking to the Present Time." It was
compiled by Mary Elizabeth Brown. The volume made handy to the general
reader a fairly representative collection of dedications.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE SEXLESS CAMERA


There is no nicer point, perhaps, in the study of photography as the one
true, detached observer of mankind than here: It sees, what man has not
seen--as his own representations show, his paintings, his drawings, his
sculptures--the feminine underpinning with a quite passive, sexless eye.

In this interesting matter there are two human conceptions. There is the
chorus girl style of leg, the expression of piquancy, which does not
perhaps appeal to the noblest emotions, but the fascination of which has
always haunted man whenever he has delineated anything in a stocking.
Then there is the chaste, nude feminine limb of the painter and the
sculptor. Both photography shows to be idealization.

When the camera reproduces the chorus girl herself, suddenly strangely
plain and painted, there is to the observing and reflective instead of
sauciness the hollowness of sauciness. There can be few things more
awful than those silent photographs of some gay chorus, reproducing, as
they do, the spectacle with solemn critical aloofness from the spirit.
It is as though the dawn of Judgment Day had suddenly broken upon the
unspeakably wretched and tawdry scene. There is something, it would
seem, indescribably tender, affectionate, in the irony of the gods which
arranges that men should display in theatre lobbies, as an inducement to
buy tickets of admission within, these death's heads of frivolity. As if
the Comic Spirit itself were touched by the charm of the naivetÃ© of man.

But, indeed, twinkling in the sympathetic light upon the Broadway stage,
the professional chorus girl leg, well selected no doubt to begin with,
and shaped with all the science of art, has beguiled even the
reflective. A light intoxicant, it swirls in the veins like champagne
for the careless moment it makes. It is pleasant because it is false.

The real leg, remarks the camera, is the amateur leg; it is depressing,
but terribly convincing. As it stands in the raw light of the cheap
photographer (and this too, too human document, the likeness of the
poor girl who has performed somewhere in curiously home-made looking
"tights," and been photographed thus afterward, is one of the stock
exhibits of that most realistic of historians, the cheap photographer)
the amateur leg decidedly lacks dash. The knee joint somehow seems to
work somewhat the wrong way. Sometimes, in circumference, this limb is
immense, sometimes the reverse. But the terribleness of it always is
that it is so human. That is, it is the leg of an animal. Subconsciously
it suggests surgery.

Conspicuous among the postures assumed for its iconoclastic purpose by
the genius of photography is that of "art." That fetish of the great
body of the unenlightened, the dim feeling that to the enlightened
bodily nakedness in pictorial representation is something very fine, is
played upon. The "art photograph" is an ironic tour de force. If
specimens of this have ever fallen in the way of your observation, then
you have reflected upon the strange discrepancy between the female nude
as presented in painting and sculpture and in photographs. (Oh, souls of
Fragonard, Boucher, Watteau, what romantic rogues you were!) You will
have perceived, with some grim humor, that until the invention of
photography, nobody, apparently, had ever seen a nude female figure.

Now there is Edgar Degas,--and it is a curious reflection that in
comparison with the work of this pessimist genius who has deliberately
brought cynicism to bear upon the female nude, photographs purporting
(over their sneer) to be reflections of beauty, give by far the most
distressing impression. In the painful realization that they have a kind
of truth beyond human art these abominable humbugs are a kind of art.
What (you exclaimed) was Schopenhauer's remark about the clouded
intellect of _man_ which could give the name of the "fair sex" to "that
under-sized, narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, knock-kneed race"?

It may be a long "drive," but it strikes you as a thoughtful observer
that there is some biological analogy between "art photographs" and the
photographs, to be seen in travel books, of native African women. What a
philosopher the camera is! The French savant was very probably
contemplating the photograph of some member of a savage tribe when he
wrote, in "The Garden of Epicurus" (addressing modern ladies): "But
never think too highly of yourselves, my sisters; you were not, at your
first appearance in the world, perfect and fully armed. Your
grandmothers in the days of the mammoth and the giant bear did not wield
the same dominion over the prehistoric hunters and cave-men which you
possess over us. You were useful then, and necessary, but you were not
invincible. To tell the truth, in those far-off ages, and for long
afterwards, you lacked charm. In those days you were like men, and men
were like brutes. To make of you the fearful and wonderful thing you are
today--veils: the Empire, crinoline, dÃ©colletÃ©, tube, pannier." And, the
sexless camera explains, the poetry of man.




CHAPTER XXV

I KNOW AN EDITOR


I know a young woman--a very handsome young woman she is, too. (I have a
decided penchant for handsome young women.) But that is beside the
point. As I was about to say (when a pleasant but an extraneous idea
interrupted me): this young woman the other day took her young husband
by the hand and conducted him to the offices of a publisher. Here she
mounted him upon a chair (very much, I fancy, as though the child were
about to have his hair cut), and she said to the barber--I mean she said
to the editor, with whom she had some acquaintance--she said: "This is
my husband. He is just out of the army. I have brought him in to have
his head shingled"---- No, no! that isn't what she said; I am getting my
wires crossed. She said, "I have brought him in to get him a position
here."

Said the editor, "What would your son, I mean your husband, like to
do?"

"I want him," replied the young woman, "to be an editor."

"Has he ever been an editor?" inquired the editor kindly, as he admired
the shape of the young woman's nose.

"No," she answered, stroking his hand (the hand, that is, of her
husband), "why, no."

"What has been his experience?" asked the editor, as the thought of all
the hard work he had to do in the next hour and a half wrestled in his
mind with his pleasure in the young woman's voice.

"Why," she said, "before he went into the army I don't know that he had
any particular experience. He was just out of college, you see."

"Oh!" said the editor, "I see. And why," he asked musingly, "do you want
him to be an editor?"

"Well, I don't know exactly," answered the young woman, "I just thought
it would be rather nice to have him be an editor."

Even so. Day after day, come into publishing houses young persons, and
indeed people of all ages, who have a hunch (and apparently nothing more
to go by) that they would like to be "an editor." Also, in every other
mail, come letters from aspirants in distant parts setting forth (what
they deem) their qualifications.

Now and then someone makes such an application who has been an editor
before. It (editing) is probably the only business he knows, and perhaps
it is too late (or his spirit is too broken) for him to take up another.
So, disillusioned but not misguided, for him there is charity of
thought. But the fledglings are in the great majority. Their
qualifications (is it necessary to say?) usually are: a university
degree, perhaps some association with a college paper, maybe the credit
of an article (or a poem) or two published in a minor magazine issued
for the Intelligentzia, a very sincere attachment to books of superior
worth, a disdain for empyreal literature, openness to a modest salary
(to begin), and an abysmal lack of any comprehension of the business of
publishing books or magazines. Every little bit turns up one who (it
develops) wants a job on the side, as it were, merely to sustain the
real business of life, which (maybe) is taking a graduate course at
Columbia, or some such thing. And in many cases (it is obvious) the real
business of life is writing poetry, or fiction, though to this end a
job must be endured--doubtless temporarily.

Now why anyone should want to be an editor beats me. No, I retract. 'Tis
quite plain. Ignorance, ma'am, sheer ignorance of the calamity. I know
an editor; in fact, I know six. One, indeed, is a brother of mine,
another is a cousin, a third an uncle. Before they became editors they
used to read books and magazines--for pleasure, sometimes; or again for
profit to their souls. Now they do neither. They read only
professionally. They can't read anything unless they have to, in the way
of business. Before they became editors they led intellectual lives;
spiritually they grew continually. They used to be perfectly delighted,
excited (as people should be), by hearing of books, of authors, new to
them. They were fascinated by the journey of their minds. They might
have gone on thus through their years, interested in themselves,
interesting to others, pillars of society. They might even, for all
their thoughts (then) were inspirations, have written delightful things
themselves. In fact, two of them did. But they became editors.

Now they, subconsciously, count the words of manuscripts. They cut
articles, like cloth, to fit. They gauge the "rate" to be paid for
this, for that. They cannot take an interest in this because something
like it has just appeared somewhere else. They can't take an interest in
that because it is not like something that has just made a hit somewhere
else. Now when they have something to read they say (like Plim, Bimm,
whatever his name was, the veteran hack novelist in the early Barrie
story), "I'll begin the damn thing at eight o'clock."

Worst of all, they have lost, totally lost, that shield against
adversity, that great joy in days of prosperity, that deep satisfaction
of life. I mean, of course, the relish of _buying_ books. Everyone knows
that to revel in the possession of a book one must covet it before one
feels one should buy it. Everyone knows that to love a book jealously
one must have made some sacrifice to obtain it. That a library which
supplies unending strength to the spirit means in all its parts, a
little here, a little there, some self-denial of other things.

But editors, poor fish, are impotent in this high and lasting pleasure;
they have lost the power to spend their money for books. They expect
books to be given to them free by the publishers. Their money goes for
Kelley pool and cigars.




CHAPTER XXVI

A DIP INTO THE UNDERWORLD


"When I go back home," he said, "and tell them about this they won't
believe it."

It was a pleasant April Sunday afternoon. We were sitting very
comfortably in a saloon over Third Avenue way about the middle of
Manhattan Island. Throngs of customers came and went through the front
door, whose wicket gate was seldom still. Whiskey glasses twinkled and
tinkled all along the long bar. Only here and there in the closely
packed line of patrons stood one with a tall "schooner" of beer before
him. Harry and Ed, in very soiled white jackets, led an active life.

You see, since theoretically intoxicants were not being sold, there was
no occasion for the pretence of being closed on Sunday and confining
business to the side door and the back room. On the table between us lay
a newspaper. Its headlines proclaimed yesterday's "liquor raids,"
thousands upon thousands of dollars worth of "rum" confiscated by the
city police in the progress of the campaign resulting from the recent
passage of the New York State "dry" law.

At the bottom of the page was a little story of the conviction of a
delicatessen dealer somewhere on the outskirts of Brooklyn on whose
premises had been discovered by the authorities a small amount of wine
containing more than one-half of one per cent alcohol.

Pete came in hurriedly. Harry and Ed glanced at him questioningly. He
nodded to them as though to say "yes," and dropped into the chair before
us. "They're comin'," he remarked. "About half a block off." Every
whiskey glass had suddenly disappeared from the bar.

Pete, a little grey man now of about fifty who arises for the day at
about noon, has had an interesting career. Once upon a time he was a
"bell-hop" in Albany. He is a devoted patron of the silent drama and a
man of intellectual interests--making a hobby of clipping from
newspapers poems and editorials which impress him and reading them
several months later to chance acquaintances who are too drowsy to
oppose him. His connection with this establishment is light and
picturesque. His duties are chiefly social. That is, he sees home one
after another customers who require that friendly attention. He is
perpetually agreeable to the suggestion of gratuitous refreshment. He is
very cheerful and gentlemanly in the matter of accommodating his tastes
to any liquid from ten-cent beer to ninety-cent Scotch which the
purchaser is disposed to pay for.

Here they were! The two police officers strolled in slowly, smiling. In
their blue and their gold buttons they looked very respendent against
the somewhat shabby scene. Ranged along before the bar were a number of
young men in the uniform of private soldiers. There were several
sailors. Here was a postman cheering himself on his rounds. There was a
huge fellow the nickel plate on whose cap announced that he was a piano
mover. The centre of a group, there was a very large man who looked as
though he had something darkly to do with ward politics. At one place in
the line was a very dapper little Japanese, who produced his money from
a wallet carried in his breast pocket. But mostly the motley company was
of the riff-raff order of humanity. That is another one of the curious
developments of "prohibition." Here, in all places of this character,
you may find an endless number of the sort of men who used to be
accustomed to paying as little as ten cents for a drink of very fiery
and inferior whiskey, now standing before the bar by the hour and paying
from fifty to seventy-five cents for whiskey (if you can call it that)
considerably worse. How on earth can they do it? I do not know.

The two policemen moved the length of the room, and came to a halt at
the open end of the bar. Here they stood for a couple of moments,
observing (I felt with some amusement) Harry and Ed serving their
beakers of beer. Then, as though suddenly having a bright idea, one of
them made his way along back of the bar to the cigar case at the front
end. He stooped, opened the sliding panel at the bottom of this and
poked around inside with his club. As he came along behind the bar back
to the open end he stooped several times to peer at the shelf below. He
joined his comrade, the two of them thrust their heads into the back
room, and then moved out through the side door.

"Well, we're safe for another hour," said Pete. "Why couldn't they find
the stuff?" I asked him. "I'll bet you couldn't find it if you'd go
behind the bar yourself," he answered. Harry and Ed had found it within
two seconds after the shadow of the law had lifted. And the room was
humming with the sound of renewed, and somewhat hectic, conviviality.
"We'll get caught pretty soon though, I guess," observed Johnnie, the
Italian "chef," who on week-days served the economical lunch of roast
beef sandwiches and "hot dogs." Harry and Ed laughed in a rather
uncomfortable way. But for the present, at least, business was too brisk
for their thoughts to be distracted more than a second or two from the
job.

"The old man," remarked Pete, referring to the proprietor, "is on a toot
again. Been under the weather for about a week now. He always gets that
way whenever one of the new law scares comes along. Gets worried or sore
or something and that upsets him."

Pete hadn't been very well himself for several days. Sick in bed, he
said, yesterday. He never used to be sick at all, "in the old days," he
declared, no matter how much he had taken the day before. Never had a
headache, or bad stomach, or anything like that. A little nervous,
perhaps, yes. "But it's the kind of stuff we get nowadays," he thought.
"There hasn't been time since prohibition started for the system to get
trained to react to this TNT stuff, like it was to regular liquor. Maybe
in ten years or in the next generation people's systems will have got
adjusted to this kind of poison and it'll be all right with 'em." It's
an interesting idea, I think.

A customer was requesting Ed to "fix him up" a pint flask. No, it
couldn't be done just now, as the supply was running too low for it to
be passed out that much at a time. The disappointed customer tried to
content himself with endeavoring to absorb as much of a pint as he could
obtain through a rapidly consumed series of single drinks. And pretty
soon it was officially announced from the bar that there would be "no
more until nine o'clock in the morning." I gathered that the reserve
stock was upstairs or downstairs and that the "old man" had gone away
with the key.

We went forth to take a walk, Pete accompanying us as a sort of
cicerone, and discoursing with much erudition of bar-rooms as we went.
"These places are getting scarce," he observed. "There don't seem to be
any, or there seems to be hardly any of the old places uptown," I
remarked. "Oh! no; not in residential neighborhoods," he replied; and I
inferred that the law was, in deference to the innocent spirit of
domesticity, keener-eyed there. "And there ain't but very few below the
dead-line downtown," Pete said.

They have, the bars, very largely disappeared from Broadway. Have been
gone from that thoroughfare for some time. And in this thought we come
upon one of the great mockeries of the situation which has existed since
the Eighteenth Amendment went (more or less) into effect. What I mean is
this: A great many people who had no ferocious opposition to the idea of
a cocktail being drunk before a meal, or wine with it, or even a liqueur
after it, did detest the saloon. It was the institution of the common,
corner saloon, I fancy, at which the bulk of American temperance
sentiment was directed.

The perverse operation of prohibition then was this: It ceased to be
possible (openly) to obtain any alcoholic beverage in anything like
wholesome surroundings, in a first-class restaurant or hotel or in a
gentleman's club. But in New York City, as is known to everybody who
knows anything at all about the matter, the saloons, and particularly
the lower class of saloons, have flourished as never before.

As we crossed Broadway Pete pointed out one place which had been going
until a short time ago, an odious looking place (as I remember it)
within. It was but a short way from a club of distinguished membership.
So much had this doggery become frequented by these gentlemen that it
became jocularly known among them as the "club annex."

Continuing on over into the West Side, here was a place, now a shop
dealing in raincoats, but formerly a "gin-mill" where throughout this
last winter there had been an extraordinary infusion of Bacardi rum,
drunk neat, as their favorite drink, by its multitudinous customers. And
there was a place, a baby carriage exhibited for sale in its window now,
which as a saloon had burned out one night not long ago; when its
proprietor accepted the catastrophe with striking cheerfulness, withdrew
his business activities to his nearby apartment and took up calling upon
old customers by appointment. Innumerable the places over which Pete
breathed a sigh, which had lately turned into tobacco stores or candy
shops.

We turned in at a door on Sixth Avenue. A little more caution seemed to
be observed here than at the place we had just left. But Pete, of
course, would pass any scrutiny. The liquor bottle, you noted, stood
within the safe at the inner end of the bar, its door hanging ready at
any moment to be kicked to. The barman covered with his hand the little
glasses he set out until you took them, and admonished, "Get away with
it!" The drinks were eighty cents a throw, but they had the feel of
genuine good-grade rye.

Night had fallen. We passed into the back room, where a pathetic object
was banging dismal tunes on a rattle-trap of a piano. A party of four
entered. The young women were very young and decidedly attractive. The
two couples began to circle about in a dance. Next moment came a
terrific thundering on the front of the building. "Cop wants less
noise," said the waiter to the dancers; "you'll have to quit." "Throw
that into you," he said to the seated customer he was serving, and
directly whisked away the glasses.

"When I go back home," said my friend from the Middle West, "and tell
them about this they won't believe it."




CHAPTER XXVII

NOSING 'ROUND WASHINGTON


I

I came very near to being shot in the White House grounds the other day.
Yep! You see, my friend is a bit on the order of what the modistes call
"stylish stout." Rather more than a bit, indeed. Looks something like a
slightly youthfuller Irvin Cobb. Also wouldn't consider it decent of him
out of doors not to "wear" his stag-handled cane. Altogether, not
unlikely to be taken for a real somebody. He was fishing round in his
breast pocket for the letter his senator from "back home" had given him
to the President's secretary. Drew out what may have seemed an important
looking document.

As we came along the path toward the executive offices there was an
up-stage looking bunch thronging about the little steps--rollicking
gamins, smartly turned out flappers, a sprinkling of rather rakish
looking young males, and (in their best black silk) a populous
representation of those highly honorable and very ample figures who have
generously mothered the young sons and daughters of the American
prairies.

Suddenly from the side lines they popped out--a whole battery of them,
with their bug-like machines on tall stilts. The motion picture camera
men were taking no chances that anything important would escape their
fire. Evidently they couldn't quite place us, however, so we got through
the door without further incident.

When we had entered the grounds through the gate at the far side of the
lawn my thoughtful friend had thrown away his lighted cigar, feeling
that promiscuous smoking here would be taboo from danger of fire to so
precious a national jewel as the White House. Within the anteroom to the
executive offices the scene very decidedly suggested one of those jovial
masculine gatherings termed a "smoker." The seething and motley company
of (obviously) newspaper men put one in mind of the recent arrival at a
military training camp of a nondescript batch of drafted men not yet got
into uniform. General air about the room of loafing in a corner cigar
store.

Then, suddenly, a rising murmur and a pell-mell push toward the door. My
friend and I were swayed out upon the step, and saw at the gate directly
at the street corner of the building the movie camera men very
vigorously clearing for action. They had halted close before them a
tall, striking and very distinguished figure. You instantly recognized
him by the insignia which he wore on the slope toward his chin of his
under lip--a wisp of whisker (light straw color) such as decorated the
illustrious countenance, too, of the late James Abbott McNeil Whistler.

He was, this gentleman, looking very sheepish, continually bowing in a
rather strained manner to the camera men and lifting his black derby hat
to them. They were scrambling about the legs of their engines and
cranking away with a rattle. "Over this way a little, Mr. Paderewski!"
yelled one. "Hold on, Mr. Paderewski, there you are!" bawled another.
Boisterous mirth about the doorway.... "That's good!" "Sure, he's only a
premier."

Then, a deferential scattering to make way for him as he approached.
Held him up again, the camera guerrillas, on the steps. He was bowing
with an effect of increasing strain and the intensity of his
sheepishness becoming painful to contemplate. His hair a white bush
thrusting out behind. Ghostly white bow tie. His black clothes
beautifully sleek and pressed. At close up, his features blunter, less
sensitive in chiselling than appears in his photographs. The flesh of
his face striking in the degree of the pinkness and fairness of
complexion of the races of Northern Europe.

My friend and I had not yet seen Mr. Christian. Had that morning called
upon Mr. Tumulty on a matter of business. Found he had set up shop in a
business structure called the Southern Building. Transom Legend: Law
Offices ... Joseph P. Tumulty. On entrance door: Joseph P. Tumulty,
Charles H. Baker. Outstanding feature of ante-chamber a life-size cream
plaster bust, on tall polished wood pedestal, of Woodrow Wilson. Mr.
Tumulty, stocky of stature, driving in manner, bustled forth from his
private office. Exhaled atmosphere of ruddiness.

My friend at times (I fear) speaks with some circumlocution. Our real
business here settled, he was ambling on toward the expression of his
hope that we might possibly be able sometime, just for a moment, to see,
just get a glimpse of....

"The President," Mr. Tumulty cut in, with an anticipating nod. My friend
looked a bit confused as (I could see) the words "the ex-President" were
about to come from him. But, undoubtedly, both of them meant the same
gentleman.

In the executive offices we trailed along with the newspaper men for
their daily afternoon interview with Mr. Christian, my friend bathing
himself in tobacco smoke as complacently as anyone of the party. Entered
a sort of council chamber. Long table down the middle. Conspicuous
ornament of the apartment, on a mantel, a plaster cast of a humorous
Uncle Sam in a dress coat, holding aloft an American flag, and flanked
by a turkeyfied looking eagle.

Congregation pressed close about the table, behind which in a swivel
chair sat in a relaxed and rather pensive attitude an angular figure,
swinging leisurely looking legs which terminated in very white sox and
low-cut shoes. A rather thick thatch of greying hair, large aquiline
features, a rather melancholy cast of expression, eyes cast downward at
the table, clothes not recently pressed and which no one would be
inclined to call dapper, Mr. Christian in general effect suggested a
good deal one's impression of a somewhat dusty "reference librarian" at
the information desk of the New York Public Library being besieged by an
unusually large number of questioners.

"Well, gentlemen," he uttered very quietly and slowly, "what have you
got on your mind?"

"George," asked a figure with pad and pencil in hand, "what about this?"
Mr. Christian appeared to ponder the matter a good while, and the upshot
of his cogitation appeared to be that there wasn't much of anything
about it. "And what is there to that?" inquired another. Well at length
there didn't seem to be much to that either. A few items of information
were given. And the audience briefly closed.

When we had filed out with the company from the room my friend and I
took seats in the corridor. He had given his letter to the doorman. A
couple of soldiers in uniform, a group of very spruce, robust and
cheery-looking Catholic priests, an elderly individual of very dejected
pose, and a miscellaneous assortment of humanity also were waiting. The
doorman was being continually accosted. "Just want to shake hands with
him, that's all," and "Just want to say 'How de do'," were solicitations
frequently overheard.

The doorman beckoned to us and told us to go into an apartment which he
indicated and "take a seat." Probably my friend didn't hear that
instruction, as he marched straight up to Mr. Christian directly upon
entering the room flooded with afternoon light pouring through an
imposing row of tall and beautiful windows. Mr. Christian slowly arose
from his desk, coming gradually to his full height, and yielded a
cautious hand to my friend. He looked at the bright and somewhat
flustered countenance of my friend rather sadly, as it seemed. Though at
some sally of my friend's about the pronunciation of his name he smiled
with considerable natural human warmth. Then very gravely he stated that
with so many appointments at present to be made, and with the
multitudinous labors now upon him, and so forth and so on, it was hardly
possible that he could just now arrange for my friend to have a word
with, as he said, ... "the Senator."

My friend was, obviously, a bit taken aback by the term, as his mind
had been careering along with visions of his seeing no less a person
than the President. But there was no doubt that both he and Mr.
Christian were referring to the same gentleman.

I should add that my friend's self-imposed mission of shaking hands with
Mr. Harding and writing an article about his impressions of him before
the President had yet given an audience to the accredited
representatives of the press was more or less audacious. And I should
add still further that Mr. Christian seemed genuinely reluctant to
dismiss my friend without a ray of hope, and suggested that he call
again after a few days. Suggestion was at Mr. Christian's own volition.

As we turned to leave the room we saw that the bevy of Catholic Fathers
and several other persons had also been admitted, and were all beaming
with bland cheerful confidence.

We strolled along the driveway leading by the front entrance to the
White House. The baggy looking policeman lazily sunning himself beside
the portico recalled to my mind with amusing contrast the snappy
Redcoats who briskly pace back and forth before Buckingham Palace.

They are superbly haughty and disdainful beings. A charmingly democratic
character, this policeman. "'At a fierce cloud over there," he observed
to us as we paused nearby.

A splendid looking army officer together with a caped naval commander
emerged with springy step from the White House door, both carrying an
air of high elation. A sumptuous car rolled up and halted beneath the
portico roof extending over the driveway. From it a lady leaned out
extending a card. Out pranced a gleaming negro flunky to receive it with
bows of elaborate courtliness. As he turned to re-enter the White House
it struck me that I did not believe I had ever seen a happier looking
human being. Also, in his beautiful dark blue tail coat with bright
silver buttons, and delicately striped light waistcoat, he brought to my
mind (incongruously enough) the waiters at Keen's Chop House. The lady
rolled on.

A bumptious looking character mounted to the entrance, and sent in a
card. It was evident in his bearing that he expected within a moment to
stride through the doorway. A figure in a skirt coat emerged. Bumptious
being springs upon him and begins to pump his hand up and down with
extraordinary verve, straining the while toward the doorway. Skirt coat
(his hand continuing to be pumped) deferentially edges bumptious
character outward toward descending steps.

It had been an exceedingly hot day for early spring. Traffic policemen
had stood on their little platforms at the centre of the street
crossings under those mammoth parasols they have to shield them from the
rigors of the Washington sun. As we proceeded toward our exit from the
grounds, approaching to the White House came a diminutive and decrepit
figure muffled in an overcoat extending to his heels, bowed under a tall
top hat, a pair of mighty ear-muffs clamped over his ears.

We had that morning visited the Capitol. My friend had been much more
interested in the guide-conducted touring parties than in the atrocious
painting of the Battle of Lake Erie, and so on, expatiated on to them.
Parties which, he said, made him feel that he was back again at the
Indiana State Fair. We had sat, in the visitors' gallery of the Senate,
in the midst of a delegation of some sort of religious sect, whose
beards had most decidedly the effect of false whiskers very insecurely
attached. Had been much struck by the extreme politeness of a new
Senator who bowed deeply to each one in turn of a row of pages he passed
before. Had responded within a few minutes to the command of "All out!"
because of executive meeting, and sympathised with the sentiments of
fellow citizens likewise ejected who went forth murmuring that they
hadn't "got much."

We had wandered through the noble and immaculate Senate Office building,
and been much impressed by the scarcity of spittoons there, an abundance
of which articles of furniture we had since boyhood associated with all
public buildings. We had sat in the outer office of our state's senator,
and listened to one lady after another explain to his secretary in this
wise: "I just made up my mind ... I just decided to go right after it
... I just determined ... I just thought ... Otherwise, of course, I
shouldn't presume to ask it."

In the Library of Congress we had been much interested to hear an
European gentleman of vast erudition connected with the Library declare
that "there was more intellectual life in Washington than in any other
city in America--that it was an European city, in the best sense." We
had been accosted on the street by a very portly and loud-voiced man who
introduced himself by inquiring where we were from; who confided that
his business in Washington had to do with an alcohol permit; and who
asked to be directed to Corcoran Gallery. We had run into an old actor
friend who was here playing, he said, "nut stuff"; and who observed that
Washington was "more of a boob town than ever." We had been assured by a
newspaper friend that Washington was so full of inventors and blue law
fans that if you "dropped a match anywhere a nut would step on it."

We had been charmed by the vast number of elderly couples apparently on
a final mellow honeymoon before the fall of the curtain. At lunch had
overheard an inland matron inquire of a waitress if scollops were
"nice." Had enjoyed hot corn bread with every meal. Had been unable to
account for the appearance on the streets of so many wounded soldiers.
Had made the mistake of getting up so early that in the deep Washington
stillness of half past seven we were scared to run the water for our
baths for fear of rousing the sleeping hotel to angry tumult. Had noted
that nowhere except in London is the fashion of freshly polished shoes
so much an institution. Had speculated as to why the standard model of
the American statesman's hat should be a blend of an expression of the
personalities of W. J. Bryan, Buffalo Bill and Colonel Watterson.

And, finally, listening in the evening to the orchestra in the corridor
of the New Willard, we discussed the large opportunities for a serious
literary work dealing with the varieties and idiosyncrasies of the
Washington hair cut. There is the Bryan type, with the hair turned
outward in a thick roll above the back of the neck, and forming a neat
hat rest. There is the roach back from a noble dome. There is the grey
curly bushy all around. There is the heavy grey wave mounting high over
one side. And--well, there seem to be an almost endless number of
styles, all more or less peculiar to the spirit of Washington, and all
of distinct distinction.


II

"Who's the old bird gettin' so many pictures took?" inquired a loitering
passerby.

A hum of much good nature was coming from the motley throng about the
steps before the executive office of the White House. "Beer and light
wine," called out someone, apparently in echo to something just said by
the queer looking character being photographed by the battery of camera
men, and a rattle of laughter went around through the group.

"That's old Coxey," replied someone. "He's down here to get Debs out,"
he added. The amiable and celebrated "General" who a number of years ago
had led his "army" on to Washington was smiling like a very wrinkled and
animated potato into the lenses of the cameras which had been moved to
within a couple of feet or so of his nose.

My friend and I crossed the street to the State, Army and Navy building.
We had been there the other day to see a young man in the State
Department to whom he had a card. Had been much struck by his beauty.
And had wondered if handsomeness was a requisite for a statesman in this
Administration.

Now we sought the press room. Presented our credentials to a press
association man there. Cordial chap. Said, "Stick around." Others
floated in. Pretty soon press association man heartily calls out to my
friend (whose name is Augustus), "George. Come on!" And we trail along
with about fifty others into the ante-chamber of the new Secretary of
the Navy, who at half past ten is to give his first interview to the
newspaper men.

Funny looking corridors, by the way, in this building. Swing doors all
about, constructed of horizontal slats, and in general effect bearing a
picturesque resemblance to the doors of the old-time saloon.

I noticed that as we went along my friend punched in one side of the
crown of his soft hat and raked it somewhat to one side of his head. He
felt, I suspected, uncomfortably neat for the society of this bonhomie
crowd of bona fide newspaper men, and did not wish to appear aloof by
being too correct in attire.

The company passed along the corridor and into the anteroom under a
heavy head of tobacco smoke. There the press association man presented
each of the flock in turn to a chubby little fellow behind a railing,
whom I took to be secretary to the Secretary; and presently the
delegation was admitted to the inner office, a spacious apartment where
one passed first an enormous globe, then a large model of the _Old
Kearsarge_ in a glass case; and at length we ranged ourselves closely
before a mountain of a man in a somewhat saggy suit. Clean shaven,
massive features, very bald dome, widely smiling, Secretary Denby looks
just a bit (I thought) like Mr. Punch. His voice comes in a deep rumble
and he has entirely ample ears. Trousers too long.

No; he had not seen the story in that morning's paper which was handed
to him by one of the reporters. He would not confirm this; he would not
deny that. After all, he had been "only a week in the job." And one
might so very easily be "injudicious." "Wily old boy," was one comment
as the party trailed out and made for the press telephones, discussing
among themselves "how would you interpret" this and that?

Next, at eleven o'clock, the Secretary of State was down on the
newspaper men's schedule. We went into a kind of waiting room across the
corridor from the real offices of the Secretary. Most conspicuous
decoration a huge painting of a Bey of Tunis, the presentation of which
(the inscription said) had something to do with condolences from France
on the death of Lincoln. Also on one wall a portrait of Daniel Webster.

Mr. Fletcher, Under Secretary of State, appeared before us. Very dapper
gentleman. Athletic in build. Fashionable clothes. Grey hair but
youthful in effect. Handsome, smooth-shaven face. Suggested an actor, or
perhaps a very gentlemanly retired pugilist. Held beautiful shell
spectacles in hand before him. Stood very straight. Had another fellow
alongside of him to supply information when himself in doubt. When asked
concerning someone who was in jail, inquired "Where is the old boy?"
Smiling cordially, seeking continually for an opportunity for some joke
or pleasantry, trying bravely to keep up a strong front, but obviously
becoming more and more uneasy under the ordeal of rapid-fire questions
about Russia, Germany, Japan and so on and so on. On being asked
concerning diplomatic appointments under consideration, bowed briskly,
replied "A great many," and escaped--almost, it might be said, fled.

Secretary of War next on the list. Full length portraits in his offices
of Generals Pershing, Bliss and Petain. Many flags, historic ones
(presumably) in glass cases. Heavy build, Secretary Weeks, very wide
across the middle. Straggling moustache, drooping. Very direct and
business-like in manner. Entered room saying, "Well, there are a number
of things I have to tell you gentlemen." Frank and positive in his
statements and denials. Stood twisting a key-ring as he talked. Wore
neat pin in tie. When told that the War Department was supposed to have
such and such a thing under consideration, he replied, tapping himself
on the breast, "Not this part of the War Department." One questioner
sought to obtain from him a more direct reply to a question that had
been put to the Secretary of the Navy. He answered, "I know nothing
about the navy." When there was apparently nothing more that he had to
say, he concluded the audience very deftly.

"He's a different guy, ain't he?" was one correspondent's observation as
we passed out of the room. "One of the biggest men in the government,"
he added. "Gives the impression of knowing as much about that job now as
Baker did when he left."

To the National Press Club we went for lunch. It is pleasant to see in
what esteem this club holds those two eminent journalists, Eugene Field
and Napoleon Bonaparte, whose portraits hang framed side beside on one
of its walls. Napoleon, however, is held in such very great regard as a
newspaper man that another and larger picture of him hangs in another
room.

The newspaper army had shifted to the business office of the White
House. As we entered Secretary Weeks was departing. He pressed through
the throng of reporters clustered about him. "Nothing to say," was
apparently what he was saying. "We are referred to Warren," said one of
the men. "Looks like we really were going to see him," said another. The
President had not yet given an interview to the press men. So we took
seats among the rows of figures ranged around the walls.

While waiting we were given an audience, so to say, by Laddie, the White
House Airedale. Curly haired breed. "How old is he?" we asked the small
colored boy whose office includes charge of him. "A year," he said. The
dog stands well, and holds his stump of a tail straight aloft, correctly
enough. But there is altogether too much black on him, we observed;
covers his breast and flanks, instead of being merely a "saddle" on his
back. "Yes, everybody says it," answered the boy.

Secretary Hughes was seen coming down the corridor on his way out. The
newspaper men pressed forward forming a narrow line through which he
walked, very erect, smiling broadly, bowing to right and left, and
continually moving his black derby hat up and down before him. "Gets a
great reception, don't he?" said one reporter, glowing with a sort of
jovial pride at Mr. Hughes.

"You'll have to see the boss," Mr. Hughes repeated a number of times as
he came along, and turning slightly made one last very good-natured bow
as he moved out through the door.

"Are they all here?" called out Mr. Christian, then marshalled us
through his office and into the large, circular and very handsome office
of the President.

While we awaited him he could be seen, through a doorway, talking, on a
porch-like structure opening out along the back of the building. He was
very leisurely in manner. I think my first outstanding impression of my
glimpse of him was that he was a very handsome man, most beautifully
dressed in a dark blue serge sack suit, very sharply pressed.

He came in, moving slowly, stood close behind his desk, and said,
"Well, gentlemen, what is there that I can tell you?" He spoke very
quietly and deliberately. The Cabinet he said had discussed problems
relating to the "hang-over" (as he put it) of the War, in particular the
trade situation of the world. He mentioned that he did not desire to be
quoted directly. He had not been "annoyed" but he had been "distressed,"
he said, by having been so quoted not long ago. The top button of his
coat was buttoned. His cuffs were stiffly starched. He inclined his head
a good part of the time to one side. Sometimes half closed his eyelids.
Then would open them very wide, and make an outward gesture with his
hands, accompanied by something like a shrug of the shoulders. Close up
I was struck by the bushiness of his eyebrows. He wore a single ring,
mounting a rather large light stone. No pin to his tie. He swung
backward and forward on his feet. Put on shell-rimmed nose glasses to
read. Sometimes pursed his lips slowly. As he talked absently rolled a
small piece of paper he had picked up from his desk into the shape of a
cigarette. His talk had a slightly oratorical roll. He was exceedingly
patient and exceedingly courteous. His general atmosphere was one of
deep kindness. In conclusion he said, "Glad to see you again."

"That's pretty nice," was the comment of one of the newspaper men as we
emerged from his presence.

As we moved away through the grounds my friend dilated on a somewhat
whimsical idea of his. This was to this effect. In motion picture plays
(my friend insisted) kings were always much more kingly in appearance
and manner than any modern king would be likely to be. But (he declared)
it would be very difficult for a motion picture concern to get hold of
any actor to play the part who would look so much like an American
President as President Harding.

We stopped in to look at the east room, now again open. A character who
had evidently not been born in any of the capitols of Europe was
admiring the place vastly. He looked with especial approval at the
enormous chandeliers, those great showers, or regular storms, of glass.
"Pretty hard to beat," was his patriotic comment.


III

It's a big old building, dark inside, the Washington Post Office. He
looked like some sort of a guard about the premises who was too tired
to stand up and so did his guarding sitting in a chair. My friend had
got so accustomed to inquiring our way to the office of Secretary
Hughes, and of Secretary Weeks, and so on, that he asked where we would
find Secretary Hays.

The man looked at us very contemptuously. "The Postmaster General?" at
length he boomed. Well, he was on the fifth floor. As we stepped from
the car my friend remarked on the practice universal in Washington of
men removing their hats when in the presence of women in elevators.

Our appointment was for ten o'clock. We had got quite used, however, to
waiting an hour or so for the gentlemen we sought to see. Several other
callers were ahead of us here, and we sat down in the outer office when
we had presented our cards to a very kind and attentive young man who
appeared to be in charge.

Within a very few minutes, however, we were ushered round into a
secluded inner office. "The General," the young man said, "will be in in
a moment. He sees them in two different rooms at the same time." This
large room was entirely bare of painting or other decorations.

Speaking of decorations reminds me of the striking handsomeness of the
Cabinet officers we had so far been seeing. Beginning with the President
himself (prize winner of the lot in this respect) the spectacle of this
Administration had up to this moment been a regular beauty show.

The physiognomy of Mr. Hays, of course, strikes a somewhat different
note in the picture. Though he is not, I should say, as funny looking as
some of his pictures suggest.

He fairly leaped into the room. Spidery figure. Calls you by your last
name without the prefix of Mister. Very, very earnest in effect. No
questions necessary to get him started. He began at once to talk. Poured
forth a steady stream of rapid utterance. Denounced the idea of labor as
a "commodity." Said: "We have a big job here. Three hundred thousand
employees. Millions of customers. I think we can do it all right,
though. But our people in the department all over the country everywhere
must be made to feel that a human spirit is behind them. It's in the
heart that the battle's won. It's because of the spirit behind them
whether our men throw a letter on the floor before a door or put it
through the door." Made a gesture with his hands illustrating putting a
letter through a door. Looked very hard at the very clean top of his
desk much of the time as he talked. Now and then looked very straight
indeed at us. Gave us a generous amount of his time. At length arose
very briskly.

Routed us out around through some side way. Had a private elevator
concealed somewhere in a dark corner. Turned us over to the colored man
in charge of it with the request, "Won't you please take my friends
down?"

As we were crossing the street we ran into our old friend from New York
who edits a very flourishing women's magazine. Down here, he said, to
get an article from Mrs. Harding. Had found her altogether willing to
supply him with an article, but in so much of a flutter with her new
activities that she didn't see her way to finding time soon to write it.
What, we asked, was the article to be about? Well, Mrs. Harding's idea
was to revive all the old traditions of the White House. And what were
those traditions? Mrs. Harding hadn't said beyond the custom of Easter
egg-rolling.

We were on our way over to see Assistant Secretary of the Navy
Roosevelt. He is not in the State, Army and Navy building where Mr.
Denby is, but some ten minutes' walk away, in the long, rather fragile
looking Navy Department building constructed during the War.

Here numerous gold-braided officers continually come and go. The
building is filled with very beautiful models of fighting ships. At one
side of Roosevelt's door is a model of the _San Diego_, at the other
side a "sample U. S. Navy Patrol Boat."

As we gave him our cards a young man asked us if we knew "the Colonel."
An old Washington newspaper man had told us that morning, "He will go
far under his own hat." Several very large men, also waiting, were
smoking very large cigars while we waited. While all male visitors to
public offices in Washington appear to smoke continually, those in
government positions apparently do not smoke during office hours. And
government business hours there seem to be queer. The Senate goes into
session at just about lunch time. The President seems to be around in
his business office throughout the whole of the middle of the day. And
the office of the Secretary of State telephones you at six o'clock
Saturday night.

The young man showed us in. Mr. Roosevelt arose from his desk, shook
hands very cordially, said "How do you do?" sat down again and at the
moment said nothing further. It was up to us to swing the conversation.
So my friend launched out: We had nothing to do with affairs of state,
had no design to interview him as to naval matters, simply were curious
to see if we should find him eating an apple and wearing white sox, or
what. With hearty good nature, Mr. Roosevelt replied that he was not
eating an apple because he did not have one to eat, and that he had only
once worn white sox, woolen ones, when a boy at school.

He was very neatly dressed in a suit of quiet dark material, wore rich
dark red tie, with a stick pin to it. Curiously weather beaten looking
complexion. As he has just published a book we asked him if he intended
to carry on more or less of a literary career together with his public
life. He said, well, perhaps more or less. But he wouldn't have time for
much such work. He "practised" writing on Saturdays and Sundays, but
mainly for the purpose of attaining to clearness in expressing himself.
He insisted that the great bulk of his father's writing had been done
_before_ the full course of his political activities and _after_ he had
retired from them.

After we had arisen to go he walked up and down the room with us, with a
somewhat arm-in-arm effect. Declared we should know a friend of his up
in Boston, because we'd "like him." Said to look in on him again any
time when in Washington. Very affable young man.

We went out on S Street to see Wilson's new house. Handsome enough
structure, but, undetached from the building next door and fronting
directly on the sidewalk, we decided that it looked somewhat more like a
club than like a private residence. Were told later that the part of
that house to look at is the back of it, as there are wonderful gardens
there.

One cannot fail to note in the numerous art shops where pictures of
Harding, Roosevelt, Washington, Lincoln and Cleveland are displayed in
abundance the relative absence of pictures of Wilson.

Why do august statesmen in the lobby of the New Willard cross their legs
so that we can see that their shoes need to be half-soled? Why do so
many distinguished looking gentlemen in Washington wear their overcoats
as though they were sleeveless capes? What on earth do so many Oklahoma
looking characters do in Washington? Why is it that there the masses do
not, as in New York and Chicago and Los Angeles, stroll about at night?

We stopped in again at the executive office of the White House.
Remarkable number of doormen there got up somewhat like policemen, so
that you repeatedly have to explain yourself all over again. Man new to
us on today. Suspiciously asked our names. Then (though what just our
names could have meant to him I cannot see) shook hands with immense
friendliness, and told us his name.

Quite a throng waiting. Busy hum all about. Different crowd from usual.
Hardly any reporters. Old gentlemen. Stout red-faced fellows with large
black slouch hats. Several youngish women with very generous bosom
displays. Some sort of a delegation, apparently. We did not make out
just what. But the scene somewhat suggested a meeting of the Los Angeles
branch of the Ohio Society. At length the company lines up. We trail in
through with the rest.

The President, looming in the centre of his office, shakes hands with
each caller in turn, in a manner of paternal affection. Holds your hand
very gently within his for a considerable while. Rather odd position he
takes when shaking hands. Right shoulder lifted. Looks (though I felt
that he was unconscious of this effect) somewhat like a pose that a
painter might put his model into when about to paint him shaking hands.

He bent over us in a very fatherly fashion. Said, yes, yes, he had got
our letters while in the South. Which was quite a mistake, as we hadn't
written him any letters. But his kindly intention was quite
unmistakable.


IV

Senator New's secretary, in his room on the second floor of the Senate
Office building, was opening a wooden box that had come by mail. No; he
wasn't exactly opening this box, either. He was looking at it
suspiciously and cautiously tipping it from side to side. "Feels like it
was a snake," he said fearsomely. "Soft, live-like weight in there. I
don't believe I'll open it. You see," indicating the stamps, "it's from
India, too."

"But why would anybody be sending Senator New a snake?" inquired my
friend.

"Goodness gracious! We get lots of things just as queer as snakes,"
replied Mr. Winter. "I guess the Senator must be coming in pretty soon,"
he remarked, glancing about. "So many people coming in," he added, and
continued: "It's a remarkable thing. Visitors seem to have some sort of
psychic knowledge of when the Senator will be in. Same way out in
Indianapolis, we could always tell when Tom Taggart was likely to be
back soon from French Lick--so many people (who couldn't have heard from
him) looking for him at the Denizen House."

"Everybody," someone observed, "always comes to Washington at least once
a year." All United-Statesians, at any rate, one would say looking about
the city, probably do. And among visiting United-Statesians not
habitually seen in such profusion elsewhere one would certainly include,
Indians, Mormons, Porto-Ricans, Civil War veterans, pedagogues,
octogenarians, vegetarians, Virginians, Creoles, pastors, suffragettes,
honeymooners, aunts, portly ladies of peculiar outline, people of a very
simple past, and a remarkable number of gentlemen who still cling to
white "lawn" ties, hard boiled shirts and "Congress shoes."

Also, of course, that vast congregation of people who "want" something
in Washington. "What are you looking for around here?" a remark commonly
overheard in the hotel lobbies.

But there are other American cities to which "everybody" goes, too, now
or then, though the visitors are not perhaps so recognizable. Coming out
of the Capitol, passing through the grounds of the White House, what do
you frequently overhear? Frequently some such remark as this: "Haven't
you ever been in the subway? To the Bronx? When you go back you
certainly must go in it."

And out in Los Angeles they boastfully tell you that one way in which
Los Angeles "is like New York" is this: That whereas a man may or may
not happen to go to Richmond or to Detroit, sooner or later you are
bound to see him on the streets of Los Angeles. That, as I say, is what
they tell you out there.

But what are those aspects of Washington which are peculiar to that
city, and make it so unlike any other city in the United States? And
which in some cases make it an influence for the bad to many of its
visitors? And which in some cases it is so strange should be the aspect
of such a city?

For one thing, the first thing which must strike any stranger to the
city is the enormous extent of the souvenir business there. It is
perhaps natural enough that this should be so, and that souvenir shops
should range themselves in an almost unbroken stretch for miles. What is
not altogether so easy to answer is why nearly all of the souvenirs
should be the kind of souvenirs they are.

Printed portraits of the present President and of former Presidents, and
plaster busts of these personages, of course. That many of the articles
for "remembrance" should be touched with a patriotic design, of course,
too. But why today should so many millions of the "souvenir spoons"
(with the Capitol in relief on the bowl), the "hand painted" plates
(presenting a comic valentine likeness of George Washington), the
paper-weights (with a delirious lithograph of the Library of Congress
showing through), the "napkin rings," butter knives, and so on and so
on--why should such millions of these things be precisely in the style
of such articles proudly displayed in the home of my grandmother when I
was a boy in the Middle West?

Outside of Washington, as far as I know in the world, any considerable
exhibition of wares so reminiscent of the taste of the past can only be
found along the water fronts of a city where men of ships shop. And
there, along water fronts, you always find that same idea of ornament.

Another thing. Where in Washington are shops where real art is
sold--paintings of reputable character and rare specimens of antique
furniture? They may be there; I do not swear that they are not, but they
are remarkably difficult to find.

Painting reminds me. The Corcoran Gallery is, of course, a justly famous
museum of art. But a minor museum, containing no Old Masters, but an
excellent collection of American painting, particularly excellent in its
representation of the period immediately preceding the present, the
period of the men called our impressionist painters. Its best canvas, I
should say, is the painting by John H. Twachtman, called (I believe)
"The Waterfall." My point is, that visitors there certainly are seeing
what they are supposed to be seeing there--art.

What I am coming to (and I do not know why someone does not come to it
oftener) is this: That hordes of people who come to Washington will look
at with wonder as something fine anything which is shown to them. The
numerous beautiful works of architecture--to which is now added the very
noble Lincoln Memorial--they see, and probably derive something from.
But the cultural benefits of their visits to their Mecca of patriotic
interest must be weirdly distorted when they are led gaping through the
Capitol and are charged twenty-five cents apiece to be told by a guard
who knows as much about paintings as an ashman a quantity of imbecile
facts about prodigious canvases atrociously bad almost beyond belief.

The Embarkation of the Pilgrims and Washington Resigning his Commission,
and so forth, indisputably are historic moments for the American breast
to recall with solemn emotion. And the iniquity of these paintings here
to minds uninstructed in works of art is that by reason of their appeal
to sentiments of love of country these nightmares of ugliness are put
over on the visitor as standards of beauty.

Still speaking (after a fashion) of "art," another aspect of Washington
hits the eye. And that is the extremely moral note here. In Los Angeles
(that other nation's playground of holiday makers) perhaps even more
picture cards are displayed for sale. A very merry lot of pictures,
those out there--all of "California bathing girls" and very lightly
veiled figures, limbs rythmically flashing in "Greek dances." Such
picture cards of gaiety of course may be found in windows here and there
on some streets in New York and other cities. But after much window
gazing I fancy that anybody bent upon buying such things in Washington
would have to get them from a bootlegger or someone like that.

And whereas, as I recall, in other centres of urban life, and especially
on the Pacific Coast, the photographers' exhibits run very largely to
feminine beauty and fashion, in photographers' windows in Washington,
you will note, masculine greatness dominates the scene.

Speaking of photographers and such-like suggests another thing. Let us
come at the matter in this way. A good many women of culture and means,
I understand, choose to live in Washington; probably in large measure
because the city is beautifully laid out, because it is a pleasant size,
because there are no factories and subways there, and so on. We know
that numerous retired statesmen prefer to remain there. There is society
of the embassies. In consideration of all this, and in consideration
further of the comparatively large leisure there for an American city,
you would suppose that, behind the transient population, in Washington,
a highly civilized life went on. Very well.

True, they have the third greatest reference library in the world and
the numerous scholars associated with it. But where do the people _buy_
their books? One bookstore of fair size. Another good but quite small. A
third dealing mainly in second-hand volumes. Not one shop devoted to
sets in fine bindings, first editions, rare items and such things.
Though in Philadelphia, for instance, there is one of the finest (if not
the finest) bookshops dealing in rare books anywhere in the world. In
San Francisco numerous bookstores. Larger cities? Yes (as to that part
of it), of course.

But it does seem queer that not a single newspaper in Washington runs
book reviews or prints any degree at all of literary comment.

Alluding to San Francisco, that happy dale of the _bon-vivant_, how does
he who likes good living make out in Washington, unless he lives in a
club, an embassy, or at the White House? A grand public market, two
first-class hotel dining-rooms, and many fine homes. But an earnest
seeker after eating as a fine art could find tucked away none of those
chop-houses and restaurants to dine in which enlarge the soul of man.

But, of course, perhaps you can't have everything at once. From the
visitors' gallery the spectacle of the Senate in active session is a
game more national than baseball. "There he goes!" cries one ardent
spectator, pointing to a "home player," so to say, moving down the
aisle. "That's him! Gettin' along pretty good, ain't he?"




CHAPTER XXVIII

FAME: A STORY OF AMERICAN LITERATURE

                          $10,000!
                IN PRIZES FOR SHORT STORIES!

     _You_ have a story. We want to read it. Every human life has one
     great story in it. Every man, every woman, has at least one story
     to tell.

                      THIS MEANS YOU!

     From your experience, from your own heart history, you can draw a
     tale. You may not know that you can write. But you never know what
     you can do until you try. We believe there are thousands of
     unwritten little masterpieces, waiting only for the right
     encouragement to be produced. Here is our offer----


BENJAMIN KEYESER drew a long breath. "This means you"--there was no
doubt about that. These printed words had read his heart. He felt that
deep was answering unto deep.

A brief rÃ©sumÃ© of his life passed through Keyes's mind. And he was
touched, as never before, by the romance of destiny. He had not
contrived to be called up to public charges or employments of dignity or
power in the world. When Ol' Necessity had tapped him on the shoulder he
had cut his scholastic pursuits short of college, and a family friend,
Dr. Nevens, had got him a fifth-rate job in a third-rate business
concern. Here it seemed extremely probable that he would spend a good
many of his days. By the continued exercise of steadiness of character,
diligence, and application, he might hope, as Dr. Nevens by way of
encouragement occasionally pointed out, to advance at the rate of a
couple of dollars or so every couple of years. Clerkdom hedged him about
as divinity doth a king.

The city directory rated him, "B. C. Keyes, Clerk." Should he be killed
in a railway accident, chosen as a juror, or arrested for homicide, the
newspapers would report that B. C. Keyes, a clerk, of 1120 Meredith
Street,--etc. There was, he felt when he looked at it fairly, no way
out. In the "Americans of Today" magazine articles, men rise from
bootblacks to multi-millionaires, but these legends, Keyes felt numbly,
had about as much relation to his own life as the hero tales of ancient
Greece. His lot was cast in the bottom of a well.

And yet,--Keyes had been considered a bright youngster at school; he
regarded himself as a rather bright young man now; and sometimes even
yet, in wayward, impractical moments, he saw in his mind a picture of
himself breaking away from the field (so to say) and coming rounding
into the home stretch to bear down on a grandstand wild with applause.
He bore about within him a subconscious premonition, as it were, which
apparently would not die, that something remarkable was to happen to him
sooner or later. An unpleasant circumstance was that it was getting
later now all the time. Still the estimate of his worth returned to him
by life did not rid him of the belief that he had been originally
intended by his Maker for higher things than he had found.

When, occasionally, the gloomy contrast of his life as it was with his
career as he conceived it had been meant to be depressed him too
untowardly, a young lady whom Keyes called Louise would administer
spiritual stimulants.

Louise was a very clever person, and she knew a superior young man when
she saw one. She did not care for your common men at all. She was
intellectual. She read everything, her friends said. She often told
Keyes that he ought to write. She knew, she declared, that he could
write better than most of the people who did write.

This idea of writing had, now and then, occurred to Keyes himself. He
was rather fond, in his odd hours, of reading periodical fiction, which
he liked to discuss with serious people like Louise. Sometimes with the
exhilaration occasioned by the reading of a particularly good story, a
romantic impulse to express himself welled up in him, and then
evaporated. Generally in these instances he wanted to write a kind of
story he had just read. He felt the glamour of the life of adventurous
tales. He thrilled in response to the note struck in that sort of
romance best exemplified, perhaps, in one of his favorites, "The Man Who
Would Be King." Or he longed to be like O. Henry, wise with the wisdom
of the Town. But there was one sort of story which always ignited in his
mind the thought that he really did know a story of his own. This he
sometimes positively yearned to tell. This the advertisement had put its
finger upon. "Every human life has one great story in it." It was even
so. "From your own heart history ..."--Benjamin Keyes felt that emotion
which is the conception of a work of art.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was pregnant with his idea. He rose from his bed betimes. He breathed
a strangely fragrant air. He looked at the beautiful world. He wrote. He
mentioned his little employment to no one: he felt rather ashamed of it,
in fact; but it infatuated him. He encountered some awful tough spots,
and at times he almost despaired--but he could not give up. Something
within him, which he himself was conscious he did not understand,
tortured him to go on. All day long, while at his business, his meals,
his shaving, his story turned and twisted and talked in the back of his
head. Despair alternated with exultation. At hours there came a gusto to
his work; words that he had heard or read, forgotten and never used,
came back to him from heaven knows where, and sprang to his pen at the
felicitous instance. He felt that his mind was more alert than he
remembered it to have ever been; he felt that his eyes were brighter;
his hands, his whole right arm, felt strong. He knew as he worked that
this was character, and this was sentiment, and this was humor. He was
shaken by the respiration of a heady drama. He felt that this--was
almost genius! And he was aghast that he had lived such a dull life
hitherto when this capacity had been in him.

He possessed little theoretic knowledge of writing; his story grew
naturally, like a tree: he was intelligent, and he had a story to tell
which must be told. In the matter of technical construction he followed
in a general way, intuitively, unconsciously for the most part, without
elaborate examination, the form of a short story as he was acquainted
with it through his reading of stories. He wandered alone at night,
oblivious of anything else, thinking, thinking his story over; and he
felt good in his brain and in his heart and in his stomach. He felt
virile, elated, full of power, and strangely happy. The joy of creating
a thing of art was upon him. Thrills ran down his spine and into his
legs; he would grin to himself in the dark streets; and sometimes he
laughed aloud. Everything else he neglected. He could not even read the
newspapers; he stayed at home two days from business; he worked early
and late, and walked up and down, throbbing, meantimes.

The story was almost finished. The story _was finished_. What would
Louise say? Would she think that he ought not to have written, ought not
to make public, so intimate a history? Then in the story he had carried
things further than they were in fact: the artistic instinct had
formally plighted the lovers' troth. He thought of submitting his
manuscript without showing it to Louise. Would it not be fine for her to
discover the story in print! But Keyes had to read that story to someone
or blow up.

       *       *       *       *       *

His evening with Louise began awkwardly. The pleasant interchange of
being did not, as usually so happily it did with Louise, flow naturally
along. Keyes was accustomed to feel that with Louise he talked better
than before anyone else. He now and then wished that certain other
people, upon whom he felt he had not made so favorable an impression as
he deserved, could overhear him sometime with Louise. Now, curiously,
with her he felt as he had with them: he could not somehow get his real
machinery started. Three or four times he determined to embark upon the
subject in his mind, and as many times the rising fulness in his chest
and the sudden quivering of his heart daunted him. As he looked now at
Louise, sitting there before him, the dignity of her as a young woman
struck him, and it occurred to him as extraordinary that he could have
been so intimate with her. He about concluded to put off his story until
another time, at which immediately he felt much relieved.

His gaze wandered about among the familiar objects of the little
parlor--the ordinary articles of the family furniture, the photographs
on the mantel, the hand-painted plate on the wall,--then rested upon the
framed Maxfield Parrish, which Keyes knew, with a glow of pride, to
express the superior refinement of Louise's own taste. Keyes shared
Louise's interest in art; he knew, and very much admired, the work of
Dulac, James Montgomery Flagg, N. C. Wyeth, Arthur Keller, and many
others; this was one of the fascinating bonds which united them, in
division from a frivolous, material, and unsympathetic world. He glanced
again now at the sumptuous Rackham book on the table, which it had been
such a delight to him to give her at Christmas; and the revived
discussion of Ã¦sthetics led him fairly comfortably into the subject of
his own entrance into work in that field. His manuscript came out of
his pocket; and, straightening up on the edge of his chair, a little
nervous again in the still pause that ensued, he cleared his throat,
and, in a rather diffident voice, began to read. As he proceeded and
knew that his effort found favor, his want of confidence left him. He
fell into the swing and color of his work; and the heart of it he tasted
like fine wine as he read. In the more moving passages his voice shook a
trifle, and tears very nearly came into his eyes; it was all, he felt,
so beautiful. When he had concluded there was in Louise's eyes--as he
looked up, and saw her sitting, leaning forward with her chin on the
back of her hand, her elbow on her knee,--a strange light. It occurred
to Keyes that he did not remember ever to have seen a woman's face look
exactly that way before. Probably not. This was a light some men never
find on land or sea. It does not shine for any man more than once or
twice. They sat awhile, these two in the little parlor, and happiness
roared through their veins. Louise told Keyes that she had always known
that he "had it in him."

Then they arose, and they were near to each other, and their hearts
were filled, and beneath the chandelier he moved his arms about her. His
lips clasped hers. It was thus as it was in the story.

Keyes emerged from the brightly lighted doorway with Louise beaming
tenderly after him. In his blissful abstraction of mind he neglected, on
the dark porchway, to turn the corner of the house to the steps; but
walked instead, straight ahead, until the world gave way beneath him,
and he collapsed with a crash among the young vines.

The next week Louise, who held a position in the "Nickel's Weekly"
Circulation Branch office in the Middle West, neatly typed the
manuscript on one of the firm's machines. One evening they went together
to post the story.... The ancient, imperturbable moon observed this
momentous deed.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Keyes put that manuscript into the mail box, he _knew_ that it
would be accepted. He felt this in his bones. He felt it in the soles of
his feet and in the hair on his head.

For several days succeeding, a sensuous complacency pervaded young
Keyes. In a rich haze he saw himself acclaimed, famous, adored. His
nature was ardent, and he had always craved the warmth of approbation;
but he had not had it, except from Louise. Now there were moments when,
in a picture in his mind, he saw an attractive figure, which he
recognized as himself somewhat altered, come jauntily along, amiably
smiling, swinging a cane. He had always secretly desired very much to
carry a cane, but he had felt uncomfortably that the humbleness of his
position in life would make this ridiculous. In his moments of ambition
he had hoped, sometimes, that walking-sticks would not go out (to put it
so) before he came in. In the background of his mental picture Keyes
recognized among the doting multitude the faces of about all of his
acquaintances, some brought for the occasion from rather remote places.

Keyes felt a slight wrench of conscience in winking at this poetic
liberty taken with realistic probability. When a name occurred to him
the physiognomy of whose person was absent, Keyes's sense of probity was
smothered, with a slight twinge of pain, by the ardor of his
imagination; and place in the press was found for this person, very
kindly well up in front, where a good view could be had by him of the
celebrity--at this point the celebrity in the delectable vision was
observed gaily to light a cigarette. Discernible in the throng, too,
were some few whose mean and envious natures writhed, the psychologist
in Keyes perceived, at this handsome recognition of the worth of a young
man it had once been their wont to snub.

In this balmy temper of mind Keyes got down to business one morning a
little late. The humdrum of a business life had begun to be somewhat
more irksome than hitherto to Keyes's swelling spirit. He ruminated this
morning, as he stood before his tall stool at his ledger, on the curious
ill-adjustment of a universe so arranged that one of his capacity for
finer things could remain so unsuspected of the world about him, and the
rich value of his life to some unmeaning task-work be allowed to give. A
sudden electric buzzing beneath his high desk signalled him that his
presence was desired by his chief. "What now?" he thought, a little
tremulously and a little irritably, as he went: he had been caught up on
several slips lately. He paused respectfully in the private office
doorway. Mr. Winder, from his swivel-chair, flashed up his white
moustache very straight at Keyes. "Sit down," he directed. The suavity
which was his habit was quite absent. Keyes felt the presence in the air
of a good deal of masculine firmness.

"This," said Mr. Winder, his eye steadily on Keyes, "is a place of
business. It is not a gentleman's club. Now, I want you to take a brace.
That will do."

As Keyes took up his pen again and began to write, "By merchandise," his
breast was full with resentment: a sense of the real integrity of his
nature welled up in him. His mind rapidly generated the divers manly
replies he wished, with an intensity amounting to pain, he had thought
of a moment before. He saw himself, now exasperatingly too late, saying
with frank honesty to Mr. Winder:

"I realize that I have of late been a little delinquent. But (with some
eloquence) it has always been my intention to be, and I believe in the
main I have been, a faithful and conscientious employee. I shall not be
found wanting again."

But here he was a rebuked culprit. He felt the degradation of servitude.
He experienced sharply that violent yearning so familiar to all that
are employed everywhere, to be able to go in and tell Mr. Winder to go
to the devil. And though he felt at bottom the legitimacy, in the
business ethic, of Mr. Winder's attitude, he also felt forlornly the
coldness of the business relation, the brutal authority of worldly
power, and its conception of his insignificance. And he was stung at the
moral criminality, as he felt it to be, of a situation which placed such
a man as Mr. Winder over such a nature as his own; Mr. Winder he did not
suppose had read a book within the last ten years.

As, at that hour which sets the weary toiler free, in the gathering dusk
Keyes stood on the curb amid the hurrying throng homeward bound,--oh!
how he longed for that establishment in the eyes of men which the
success of his story would bring him. Oh, when would he hear! As he
bowled along in the crowded trolley the thought stole through him, until
it amounted almost to a conviction, that the great letter awaited him at
home now. He could hardly bear the tedium of the short journey.
Restlessly he turned his evening paper.

In him had developed of late a great interest in authors; he peered
between the pages, a little sheepishly, at the column, "Books and Their
Makers." He read that Mr. So and So, the author of "This and That," was
a young man thirty years of age. Instantly he reflected that he himself
was but twenty-seven. This was encouraging! He had formed a habit
recently of contrasting at once any writer's age with his own. If he
learned that Mr. Galsworthy, whose books were much advertised but which
he had not read, was forty-something, he wanted to know how old he had
been when he wrote his first book. Then he counted up the number of
books between that time--comparing his age at that time with his
own--and now. He was absorbed in the literary gossip of the day. That
Myra Kelly had been a schoolteacher, that Gertrude Atherton lived in
California, that Mr. Bennett had turned thirty before he published his
first book, that such a writer was in Rome, or that some other one was
engaged on a new work said to be about the Russian Jews,--he found very
interesting. He read in his newspaper the publishers' declaration that
Maurice Hewlett's new creation recalled Don Quixote, Cyrano, d'Artagnan,
Falstaff, Bombastes Furioso, Tartarin, Gil Blas. His notions concerning
the characters of this company were somewhat vague; but he was stirred
with an ambition to create some such character, too.

On leaving the car whom should he see but Dr. Nevens. They walked along
together. Dr. Nevens inquired about the business. A bad year, he
surmised, for trade. Trade! Keyes felt his heart thumping with the
temptation to confide the adventures of his literary life; which,
indeed, he had found exceedingly difficult to keep so much to himself.
But his position gave him clairvoyance: he divined that no sort of
ambition receives from people in general so little respect, by some
curious idiosyncrasy of the human mind, as literary aspiration. With
what coarse and withering scorn had an intimation--which had escaped
him--that he had sought to give some artistic articulation to his ideas
been met by Pimpkins the other day at the office!

The personality of Dr. Nevens, however, suggested a more sympathetic
attitude, by reason of the dentist's cultivation. Dr. Nevens was spoken
of as a "booklover." He had a "library"--it was, he implied, his
bachelor foible--the cornerstone of which was a set of the Thistle
edition of Stevenson that he had bought by subscription from an agent.
(Keyes had thought it odd one day that Dr. Nevens had not cut the
leaves.) And "the doctor" was fond of speaking familiarly of Dickens,
and gained much admiration by his often saying that he should like--had
he time--to read through "Esmond" once every year. Here, Keyes felt,
would be spiritual succor.

But Keyes quickly learned that he was quite in a different case from the
author of "Esmond." Dr. Nevens was kind, but pitying.

"Only one out of hundreds, thousands," he said, "ever comes to
anything."

It did not occur to him, Keyes thought, as within the range of remotest
possibility that he, Keyes, _might_ be one of these. Then came the
doctor's reason.

"You do not know anything," he said paternally, "anything at all."

Keyes realized, with some bitterness, that this world is not an
institution existing for the purpose of detecting and rewarding inner
worth. He had known enough to write his story, he guessed. With some
flare of rage, he felt that simply unsupported merit is rather frowned
upon, as tending by comparison to cast others possibly not possessing so
much of it somewhat into the shade. He had a savage thought that when
he was Dr. Nevens's age he would not be a country dentist. He saw the
intense egoism of mankind.

Dr. Nevens was determined to show a young man who had betrayed a
consciousness of superiority of grain, his place--economically and
socially. The selfish jealousy of the world!

       *       *       *       *       *

His letter had not come. There was only a package from Louise--a copy of
"Book Talk," containing a marked article on "Representative American
Story Tellers"; from this, after dinner, Keyes imbibed most of the
purported facts about Booth Tarkington. Then he went to bed to sleep
through the hours until the return of the postman.

The next evening still there was no letter. Keyes's spirit was troubled.
He sought the solace of solitude in the quiet, shadowed streets. A
reaction was succeeding his rosy complacency! Doubts pierced his
dissolving confidence. Was his story so good, after all? Somehow, as he
looked back at it now, it seemed much less strong than it had before. He
felt a sort of sinking in his stomach. A sickening suspicion came to
him that, perhaps, it was absurd. Maybe it was very silly. In a
disconnected way certain remarks and passages in it came back to him now
as quite questionable. Yes, they sounded pretty maudlin. He squirmed
within with mortification as a recollection of these passages passed
through his mind. He hoped his story would never get into print. A fear
that it might nauseated him. Then he was suffused with a sensation of
how little he amounted to. He felt, with a sense of great weakness, the
precariousness of his job. A horror came over him that he might lose it.
He wished he did not know Louise, who expected things of him. He felt
how awkward it was so to fail her. In the position he had got himself
into with her, how he had laid himself open to humiliating exposure! Oh,
why had he ever sought her? He wished he did not know anybody well. He
was an ass and he would never come to anything. He felt the futility of
his life. Why could he not slink away somewhere and live out his feeble
existence unobserved? As he got into bed he felt that very easily he
could cry.

       *       *       *       *       *

         The August
      FAVORITE MAGAZINE
     This number contains
    The Great Prize Story
            by
    BENJAMIN CECIL KEYES
      GET        IT!!

       *       *       *       *       *

... Keyes stood before a downtown news-stand. Hurrying pedestrians
bumped into him. An irascible character or two, thus impeded, glared
back at him--what was the matter with the fellow! Did he think there was
nobody but himself in the world?

B. C. Keyes walked home to the sound of a great orchestra reverberating
through him. He could not tolerate the thought of subduing himself to
the confinement of a car. He needed movement and air.

It had come, his great letter, a few weeks before. At his sitting down
to dinner his mother had given him the envelope. _The Favorite
Magazine_--these words had seemed to him to be printed in the upper
left-hand corner; it had struck him that perhaps the strain on his
nerves of late had so deranged his mind that he now saw, as in a
mirage, what was not. "Benjamin C. Keyes, Esq."--so ran the address.
Keyes in his dizziness noted this point: people had not customarily
addressed him as _esquire_. Then, for the first time in his life, he
held in his hand a substantial check payable to his own name--wealth!
Courteous and laudatory typewritten words danced before his burning
eyes.

He felt, though in a degree an hundred times intensified, as though he
had smoked so much tobacco, and drunk so much coffee, he could not
compose himself to eat, or read a paper, or go to bed, or stay where he
was; but must rush off somewhere else and talk hysterically. He got
through his meal blindly. He could not explain--just yet--to his mother:
he felt he could not control the patience necessary to begin at the
beginning and construct a coherent narrative.... He must go to Louise
who already understood the preliminary situation.

It had occurred to Keyes on his hurried, stumbling way thither that the
whole thing was unbelievable, and that he must be quite insane. After he
had pushed the bell, an interminable time seemed to elapse before his
ring was answered. As he stood there on the porch he felt his flesh
palpitating. A terrible fear came over him that Louise might not be at
home.... Louise said, when her frenzy had somewhat abated, that she had
always known that he "had it in him." She told him there was now "a
future" before him.... Keyes had determined to go on about his business
as though nothing unusual had occurred; then when the story appeared, to
accept congratulations with retiring modesty. Before noon the next day
he had told three people; by night, seven.

So, going over it all again, Keyes arrived at home, to learn that--"What
do you think?" His mother said "a reporter" had been at the house; an
occurrence--quite unprecedented in Mrs. Keyes's experience--which had
thrown her into considerable agitation. This public official she had
associated in her confusion with a policeman. He had, however, treated
her as a personage of great interest. He told her "there was nothing to
be ashamed of." He drew from her trembling lips some account of her
son's life, and requested a photograph.

Next day the dean of local newspapers, vigilant in patriotism, printed
an extended article on the "state's new writer." And in an editorial
entitled "The Modern Athens" (which referred to Keyes only by
implication) the paper affirmed again that Andiena was "by general
consent the present chief centre of letters in America." It
recapitulated the names of those of her sons and daughters whose works
were on the counters of every department store in the land. It concluded
by saying: "The hope of a people is in its writers, its chosen ones of
lofty thought, its poets and prophets, who shall dream and sing for it,
who shall gather up its tendencies and formulate its ideals and voice
its spirit, proclaiming its duties and awakening its enthusiasm." Keyes
read this, as he took it to be, moving and eloquent tribute to his prize
story with feelings akin to those experienced, very probably, by Isaiah.

Keyes received an ovation at "the office." The humility of Pimpkins's
admiration was abject. Keyes perceived the commanding quality of
ambition--when successful. Miss Wimble, the hollow-breasted cashieress,
regarded him with sheep's-eyes. Even Mr. Winder, in passing,
congratulated him upon his "stroke of luck."

Wonders once begun, it seemed, poured. Two letters awaited him that
evening. One from the editor of _The Monocle Magazine_. _The Monocle
Magazine_, as Louis said, "think of it!" The editor of this
distinguished institution spoke of his "pleasure" in reading Mr. Keyes's
"compelling" story; he begged to request the favor of the "offer" of
some of Keyes's "other work." By way of a fraternal insinuation he
mentioned that he was a native of Andiena, himself. "Most of us are,"
was his sportive comment. The "Consolidated Sunday Magazines, Inc.,"
wrote with much business directness to solicit "manuscript," at
"immediate payment on acceptance at your regular rates for fiction of
the first class."

       *       *       *       *       *

The extraordinary turn of events in Keyes's life brought him visitors as
well as letters. Dr. Nevens called, benignly smiling appreciation. His
impression appeared to be that he had not been mistaken in giving Keyes
his support. Of more constructive importance, however, was the turning
up of Mr. Tate, who had been Keyes's instructor in "English" at the
Longridge High School. A slender, pale, young man, with a bald, domed
forehead "rising in its white mass like a tower of mind," Mr. Tate was
understood to nourish a deep respect for literature. He had contributed
one or two very serious and painstaking "papers" on the English of
Chaucer (not very well understood by Keyes at the time), to "Poet-Lore";
and had edited, with notes, several "texts"--one of "The Lady of the
Lake," with an "introduction," for school use. He reverenced, he now
made evident, the "creative gift," as he designated it; which, he
realized, had been denied him. He had come to pay homage to a vessel of
this gift, his former pupil, now illustrious.

With the hand of destiny Mr. Tate touched a vital chord. Self-assertion;
to be no longer an unregarded atom in the mass of those born only to
labor for others; to find play for the mind and the passion which, by no
choice of his own, distinguished him from the time slave: this was now
Keyes's smouldering thought. Mr. Tate, from his conversancy with the
literary situation, reported that there never was in the history of the
world such a demand for fiction as now, and that "the publishers"
declared there was not an overproduction of good fiction. Editors, Mr.
Tate said, were eager to welcome new talent. He strongly encouraged
Keyes to adopt what he spoke of as the "literary life." In fact, he
seemed to consider that there was no alternative. And, indeed, already
in Keyes's own idea of his future he saw himself eventually settled
somewhere amid the Irvin-Cobbs, the Julian-Streets, the
Joseph-Hergesheimers, and other clever people whose society would be
congenial to him.

For the present he cultivated his ego, as became a literary light; and
now, with Mr. Tate's assistance, he began to devote the time at his
command to preparation for his life's work, to study. Mr. Tate was
ardent to be of service; he felt that he had here connected himself with
literary history in the making. The great need for Keyes, he felt, was
education. The creative genius, Mr. Tate said, could not be implanted;
but he felt that this other he could supply. He recommended the patient
study of men and books. He thought that what Keyes needed in especial
was "technical" knowledge; so he went at that strong. Maupassant, Mr.
Tate said, was the great master of the short story. Keyes began his
evening studies in English translations of Maupassant.

The galling yoke of his business life was becoming well-nigh unbearable.
His soul was in ferment. If only he did not have to get up to hurry
every morning down to that penitentiary, there to waste his days, he
could get something done. That sapped his vitals. And he was tortured by
a flame--to do, to read, study, create, grow, accomplish! He was
expanding against the walls of his environment. God! could he but burst
them asunder, and leap out!

Mr. Tate had a high idea of a thing which he spoke of as "style." In
elucidation of this theme he suggested perusal of essays and treatises
by DeQuincey, Walter Pater, and Professor Raleigh, He felt also that the
"art of fiction" should be mastered by his protÃ©gÃ©. So Keyes pitched
into examinations of this recondite subject by Sir Walter Besant, Marion
Crawford, R. L. Stevenson, and Anthony Trollope. Keyes realized that he
had _not_ realized before what a lot there was _to_ writing. Mr. Tate
purchased out of his slender means as a present, "Success in
Literature," by G. H. Lewes. He unearthed a rich collection in titles of
books the consumption of which literature would be invaluable to one in
training for the literary profession. An admirable bibliography, this
list, of the genre which was Keyes's specialty:--"The Art of Short
Story Writing," "Practical Short Story Writing," "The Art of the Short
Story," "The Short Story," "Book of the Short Story," "How to Write a
Short Story," "Writing of the Short Story," "Short Story Writing,"
"Philosophy of the Short Story," "The Story-Teller's Art," "The Short
Story in English," "Selections from the World's Greatest Short Stories,"
"American Short Stories," "Great English Short-Story Writers." In the
reading room of the public library Keyes followed a series of articles
in "Book Talk" on the "Craftsmanship of Writing." He advanced in
literary culture, under Mr. Tate's zealous lead, to consideration of
"the novel," its history and development. And, too, to the drama, its
law and technique. His head was filled with the theory of dÃ©nouements,
"moments," rising actions, climaxes, suspended actions, and
catastrophes. At times he had an uneasy feeling that all these things
did not much help him to think up any new stories of his own. But Mr.
Tate said "that" would "come."

       *       *       *       *       *

And wealth and fame were even now at hand. The promoters of the great
prize contest advertising dodge had not been at fault in business
acumen; the winning story returned ample evidence of its popular appeal.
It was akin to the minds of the "peepul." _The Favorite Magazine_ was
sold during August by enterprising newsboys _on trolley cars_. That
great public whose literature is exclusively contemporaneous,--whose
world of letters is the current _Saturday Mail-Coach_, the _All-people's
Magazine_, the _Purple Book_, the _Nothing-But-Stories_, the _Modiste,
The Swift Set, Jones's--the Magazine that Entertains, Brisk Stories,
Popularity_, and the _Tip-Top_,--discussed the big features on front
porches. Keyes's story even attracted the interest of those _who seldom
read anything_. A number of letters from persons of that impulsive class
which communicates its inward feelings to authors personally unknown
were forwarded to Keyes from his publishers. A young lady resident in
St. Joe, Michigan, wrote to say that she thought the scene where the
boat upsets was the "_grandest thing_ ever written."

Imagine a man like Keyes sitting his days away on an office stool. His
mother, however, could not "see" his resigning his position. His
"father had always" ... and so forth. Keyes foamed within. What a
thing--woman's maddening narrowness! At the office Keyes's situation
grew, in subtle ways, more and more oppressive. His position appeared to
become equivocal. Mr. Winder seemed to make a point of increasing
exactness. Keyes felt a disposition in authority to put down any
subordinate uppishness of feeling possibly occasioned by doings outside
the line of business. And he became conscious, too, of a curious
estrangement from his associates there. They, on their side, Pimpkins in
especial, seemed to feel that he felt he was too good for them. And, in
truth, he did. The mundane aims of those around him got on his nerves.
Their commonplace thoughts irritated him. They were _common_ natures.
But, with fierce secret joy, Keyes knew that an event was approaching
which promised, would command, deliverance from it all.

Fall came. And the Favorite Publishing Company bound up the prize story
as a "gift book" for the holiday trade. Claud Clarence Chamberlain, the
well-known illustrator and creator of the famous "Picture-Hat Girl," was
commissioned to make the decorations. These were done with much dash in
highly colored crayon and popular sentiment. One was printed on the
paper jacket of the book, with the title in embossed letters. The
advertisement pronounced the work altogether "an exquisite piece of
book-making." It declared the production the "daintiest gift of the
season," and reminded "people of culture and refinement" that there was
"no present like a book."

Indeed a hero is not without fame in his own country. The
Stanton-Merritt bookstore on Capital Street arranged a window display of
about a ton of "Will Rockwell Makes Good," with one of Mr. Chamberlain's
original illustrations, framed, in the centre. A monster advertising
banner was flung across the front of the store above the entrance and
windows. Just inside, a pyramid breast-high was built of the books,
beneath an artistic piece of work--a hanging board upon which was burned
in old English letters: "'A good book is the precious life blood of a
Master Spirit'--Milton." A lady who informed the salesman that she
thought "books" were "just fine," bought twenty copies for holiday
distribution. She inquired if there was not a discount on that number
purchased.

Drugged with triumph, they returned together Saturday night from the
exhibition "down town"; and, in the now historic little parlor again,
Louise wept upon the shoulder of her affianced. Yes; they were formally
engaged. Keyes was not without a sensation that the situation was rather
chaotic. But destiny seemed to close in on him and bear him on.

The reviewers got on the job. And they were there with the goods.
Statements from a few typical press notices follow. "An absorbing
story," said the Topeka _Progressive_, "throbbing with optimism." "Mr.
Keyes strikes a new note in this unusual production; vivid,
dramatic,"--San Francisco _Lookout_. "A story of vivid and compelling
interest," one critic declared. "A delightful story, rich in heart
throbs," was one good one. One reviewer said, "Here we have a real love
story, a tale of love, tender and true, delightfully narrated. There are
so many fine, tender passages in the episode of these two, who live just
for each other, that reading the little book is like breathing strong,
refreshing air." "The creator of 'Will Rockwell," said one paper, "has
here written a new idyl of America." "An inspiring picture," said
another. One very fine critique said: "Once in awhile, possibly once in
a lifetime, there arises before us a writer of fiction whose genius is
undeniable the instant it greets us." When Keyes read this, quoted in
his publisher's latest newspaper advertisement, he knew that he had
found his work in the world. And reasoning from his experience, he saw
before him a calling that would be ever a noble intoxication of the
soul, a kind that would know naught of headaches or remorse.

But perhaps the best of all the critical dicta was this: "Written," it
declared, "with blood and tears and fire." Very impressive was the
number of times that were used such adjectives as "big," "vital,"
"absorbing," "compelling," "remarkable," "insistent," and "virile."
"Optimism," it developed too, was the supreme merit of fiction. One of
the arresting terms employed was "economy of means."

There were, it is true, a few dissenting voices from the chorus of
unrestrained praise, chiefly from certain notoriously dull,
conservative, killjoy journals. The New York _Evening Postman_ said:
"This somewhat amateurish little essay in fiction seems to be the
product of an untutored sincerity. In this, its sincerity, it is not
without a degree of vigor. We doubt, however, whether the author can
repeat the performance." And that irrepressibly ribald organ, the New
York _Beam_, could not forbear its customary jocular sport. Its smart
review of this little classic (as one bookseller already pronounced it)
began: "Hooray for 'Will'! Hooray also for 'Mabel'! They are the real
simegoozlia."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Don't you think you could write something now, dear?" inquired Mrs.
Keyes, who did not see how scholarship pure and simple was, so to say,
to move the boat.

This idea of writing something now had indeed occurred to Keyes; but
somehow he had not been able to think of anything in particular to
write. So he went on with his studies, at the same time keeping an eye
open for available material, characters, and plots.

"Surely you can write something, Ben, that we could get some money for,"
said Louise. A wife, after all, is only a woman, with a mind fitted to
petty things, such as groceries, family washings, clothing, and divers
household bills. It is irritating to a man of lofty mind who night and
day is racking his brain for an idea, to be prodded on in this fashion.
Keyes ground his teeth and bore it; he reflected that an author's life
is frequently a battle with mediocrity. Perhaps he was mistaken as to
where lay the mediocrity with which he battled.

He fretted and worried and at length sat himself down to write without
an inspiration. He bethought himself of Trollope's example to literary
aspirants, and tried to grind out two hundred and fifty words every
fifteen minutes for three hours a day. He couldn't write twenty. He kept
doggedly on. He could not make his characters act or talk--the talk was
the most hopeless thing of all. He couldn't, as once he had done, cry
over them. Sometimes, in the stillness of the night with his clock
ticking before him, he almost thought that he had regained for a moment
a tithe of the power he once had; but in the morning when he reviewed
his work he admitted that he had been sadly mistaken. Now doubts haunted
his soul; even as he wrote another consciousness within not thus
employed whispered of his impotency. Fact is, Keyes had not at all the
creative gift.

He struggled through a number of stories, some better and some worse.
When he mailed these it was with a faltering, doubting heart. Something
with a weak action away in his interior told him that they would not be
accepted.

Keyes got thinner in flesh, more distressed in spirit, and poorer in
this world's goods as time went on. Sometimes he felt like an imposter
and was ashamed to face his wife; then he reread his press notices and a
fever to do something shook him. But a man cannot support himself and
his wife on a fever to do something. Benjamin Cecil Keyes could not
understand the thing: if he had literary genius why couldn't he write?
If he had not, how then had he written? To sit in full view of one's
wife day after day pretending to be interested in a book when the
bill-collector calls; and to be tormented all the time by a desire to do
something and not to be able to do it, or know when, if ever, one will
be able; and to be ashamed and afraid to tell one's wife this; but to be
compelled to be there, or to run away, or to hang one's self--this is a
situation more than uncomfortable.

A thousand times Keyes decided to roll up his sleeves and do something
else--engage in any profitable employment; and a thousand times he
decided not to--just yet. A man often exists in this way until he gets
quite to the end of the string where the wolf is.

"That was an accident, Louise," said Keyes sadly one day. "I find I
can't write."

Keyes was mistaken again. No fine thing ever was made by accident. Keyes
managed to write that story because its theme was the most interesting
incident in his life; because it appealed to him more strongly than
anything else had in his whole experience; because he was thoroughly
familiar with the life and the people he featured in his story; because
he was absolutely sincere in his sympathies, appreciation, and emotions
here; he had no ideals set way beyond his power, no aping tendencies
after an effective style, no attention distracted by an ill-digested
knowledge of mechanical construction. The structure, and the style
simply came, probably because--and finally he managed to write that
story because--he was keyed up to it.

A domestic woman often has a wretchedly unworshipful view of art and
fame. Keyes's confession did not kill Louise. I suppose he expected her
to go back to her parents in high dudgeon as one who had been grossly
swindled.

"Do you care if you can't write?" she said, after a moment's silence.
"Just think how nice you are--how much nicer you were before you tried
to write! And how it has worried you!"

Keyes got a job as a collector for a mercantile house. "My health
demands outdoor employment," he told his acquaintances.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes, alone with his lamp after the day's confounded drudgery,
Keyes got out the old magazine and reread his forgotten story.


THE END.


That all men are beggars, 'tis very plain to see,
    Though some they are of lowly, and some of high degree:
    Your ministers of State will say they never will allow
    That kings from subjects beg; but that you know is all bow-wow.
        Bow-wow-wow! Fol lol, etc._

The Souls of Black Folk

by

W.E.B. Du Bois


Herein Is Written


The Forethought

Herein lie buried many things which if read with patience may show the
strange meaning of being black here at the dawning of the Twentieth
Century.  This meaning is not without interest to you, Gentle Reader;
for the problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color
line.  I pray you, then, receive my little book in all charity,
studying my words with me, forgiving mistake and foible for sake of the
faith and passion that is in me, and seeking the grain of truth hidden
there.

I have sought here to sketch, in vague, uncertain outline, the
spiritual world in which ten thousand thousand Americans live and
strive.  First, in two chapters I have tried to show what Emancipation
meant to them, and what was its aftermath.  In a third chapter I have
pointed out the slow rise of personal leadership, and criticized
candidly the leader who bears the chief burden of his race to-day.
Then, in two other chapters I have sketched in swift outline the two
worlds within and without the Veil, and thus have come to the central
problem of training men for life.  Venturing now into deeper detail, I
have in two chapters studied the struggles of the massed millions of
the black peasantry, and in another have sought to make clear the
present relations of the sons of master and man.  Leaving, then, the
white world, I have stepped within the Veil, raising it that you may
view faintly its deeper recesses,--the meaning of its religion, the
passion of its human sorrow, and the struggle of its greater souls.
All this I have ended with a tale twice told but seldom written, and a
chapter of song.

Some of these thoughts of mine have seen the light before in other
guise.  For kindly consenting to their republication here, in altered
and extended form, I must thank the publishers of the Atlantic Monthly,
The World's Work, the Dial, The New World, and the Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science.  Before each chapter,
as now printed, stands a bar of the Sorrow Songs,--some echo of
haunting melody from the only American music which welled up from black
souls in the dark past.  And, finally, need I add that I who speak here
am bone of the bone and flesh of the flesh of them that live within the
Veil?

W.E.B Du B.

ATLANTA, GA., FEB. 1, 1903.




I

Of Our Spiritual Strivings

  O water, voice of my heart, crying in the sand,
    All night long crying with a mournful cry,
  As I lie and listen, and cannot understand
      The voice of my heart in my side or the voice of the sea,
    O water, crying for rest, is it I, is it I?
      All night long the water is crying to me.

  Unresting water, there shall never be rest
    Till the last moon droop and the last tide fail,
  And the fire of the end begin to burn in the west;
      And the heart shall be weary and wonder and cry like the sea,
    All life long crying without avail,
      As the water all night long is crying to me.

  ARTHUR SYMONS.


Between me and the other world there is ever an unasked question:
unasked by some through feelings of delicacy; by others through the
difficulty of rightly framing it.  All, nevertheless, flutter round it.
They approach me in a half-hesitant sort of way, eye me curiously or
compassionately, and then, instead of saying directly, How does it feel
to be a problem?  they say, I know an excellent colored man in my town;
or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not these Southern outrages make
your blood boil?  At these I smile, or am interested, or reduce the
boiling to a simmer, as the occasion may require.  To the real
question, How does it feel to be a problem?  I answer seldom a word.

And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,--peculiar even for
one who has never been anything else, save perhaps in babyhood and in
Europe.  It is in the early days of rollicking boyhood that the
revelation first bursts upon one, all in a day, as it were.  I remember
well when the shadow swept across me. I was a little thing, away up in
the hills of New England, where the dark Housatonic winds between
Hoosac and Taghkanic to the sea.  In a wee wooden schoolhouse,
something put it into the boys' and girls' heads to buy gorgeous
visiting-cards--ten cents a package--and exchange.  The exchange was
merry, till one girl, a tall newcomer, refused my card,--refused it
peremptorily, with a glance.  Then it dawned upon me with a certain
suddenness that I was different from the others; or like, mayhap, in
heart and life and longing, but shut out from their world by a vast
veil.  I had thereafter no desire to tear down that veil, to creep
through; I held all beyond it in common contempt, and lived above it in
a region of blue sky and great wandering shadows.  That sky was bluest
when I could beat my mates at examination-time, or beat them at a
foot-race, or even beat their stringy heads.  Alas, with the years all
this fine contempt began to fade; for the words I longed for, and all
their dazzling opportunities, were theirs, not mine.  But they should
not keep these prizes, I said; some, all, I would wrest from them.
Just how I would do it I could never decide: by reading law, by healing
the sick, by telling the wonderful tales that swam in my head,--some
way.  With other black boys the strife was not so fiercely sunny: their
youth shrunk into tasteless sycophancy, or into silent hatred of the
pale world about them and mocking distrust of everything white; or
wasted itself in a bitter cry, Why did God make me an outcast and a
stranger in mine own house?  The shades of the prison-house closed
round about us all: walls strait and stubborn to the whitest, but
relentlessly narrow, tall, and unscalable to sons of night who must
plod darkly on in resignation, or beat unavailing palms against the
stone, or steadily, half hopelessly, watch the streak of blue above.

After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and
Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and
gifted with second-sight in this American world,--a world which yields
him no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through
the revelation of the other world.  It is a peculiar sensation, this
double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one's self
through the eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape of a
world that looks on in amused contempt and pity.  One ever feels his
twoness,--an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose
dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.

The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife,--this
longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into
a better and truer self.  In this merging he wishes neither of the
older selves to be lost.  He would not Africanize America, for America
has too much to teach the world and Africa.  He would not bleach his
Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro
blood has a message for the world.  He simply wishes to make it
possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being
cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without having the doors of
Opportunity closed roughly in his face.

This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the
kingdom of culture, to escape both death and isolation, to husband and
use his best powers and his latent genius.  These powers of body and
mind have in the past been strangely wasted, dispersed, or forgotten.
The shadow of a mighty Negro past flits through the tale of Ethiopia
the Shadowy and of Egypt the Sphinx.  Through history, the powers of
single black men flash here and there like falling stars, and die
sometimes before the world has rightly gauged their brightness.  Here
in America, in the few days since Emancipation, the black man's turning
hither and thither in hesitant and doubtful striving has often made his
very strength to lose effectiveness, to seem like absence of power,
like weakness.  And yet it is not weakness,--it is the contradiction of
double aims.  The double-aimed struggle of the black artisan--on the
one hand to escape white contempt for a nation of  mere hewers of wood
and drawers of water, and on the other hand to plough and nail and dig
for a poverty-stricken horde--could only result in making him a poor
craftsman, for he had but half a heart in either cause.  By the poverty
and ignorance of his people, the Negro minister or doctor was tempted
toward quackery and demagogy; and by the criticism of the other world,
toward ideals that made him ashamed of his lowly tasks.  The would-be
black savant was confronted by the paradox that the knowledge his
people needed was a twice-told tale to his white neighbors, while the
knowledge which would teach the white world was Greek to his own flesh
and blood.  The innate love of harmony and beauty that set the ruder
souls of his people a-dancing and a-singing raised but confusion and
doubt in the soul of the black artist; for the beauty revealed to him
was the soul-beauty of a race which his larger audience despised, and
he could not articulate the message of another people.  This waste of
double aims, this seeking to satisfy two unreconciled ideals, has
wrought sad havoc with the courage and faith and deeds of ten thousand
thousand people,--has sent them often wooing false gods and invoking
false means of salvation, and at times has even seemed about to make
them ashamed of themselves.

Away back in the days of bondage they thought to see in one divine
event the end of all doubt and disappointment; few men ever worshipped
Freedom with half such unquestioning faith as did the American Negro
for two centuries.  To him, so far as he thought and dreamed, slavery
was indeed the sum of all villainies, the cause of all sorrow, the root
of all prejudice; Emancipation was the key to a promised land of
sweeter beauty than ever stretched before the eyes of wearied
Israelites.  In song and exhortation swelled one refrain--Liberty; in
his tears and curses the God he implored had Freedom in his right hand.
At last it came,--suddenly, fearfully, like a dream.  With one wild
carnival of blood and passion came the message in his own plaintive
cadences:--

  "Shout, O children!
  Shout, you're free!
  For God has bought your liberty!"


Years have passed away since then,--ten, twenty, forty; forty years of
national life, forty years of renewal and development, and yet the
swarthy spectre sits in its accustomed seat at the Nation's feast.  In
vain do we cry to this our vastest social problem:--

  "Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
  Shall never tremble!"


The Nation has not yet found peace from its sins; the freedman has not
yet found in freedom his promised land.  Whatever of good may have come
in these years of change, the shadow of a deep disappointment rests
upon the Negro people,--a disappointment all the more bitter because
the unattained ideal was unbounded save by the simple ignorance of a
lowly people.

The first decade was merely a prolongation of the vain search for
freedom, the boon that seemed ever barely to elude their grasp,--like a
tantalizing will-o'-the-wisp, maddening and misleading the headless
host.  The holocaust of war, the terrors of the Ku-Klux Klan, the lies
of carpet-baggers, the disorganization of industry, and the
contradictory advice of friends and foes, left the bewildered serf with
no new watchword beyond the old cry for freedom.  As the time flew,
however, he began to grasp a new idea.  The ideal of liberty demanded
for its attainment powerful means, and these the Fifteenth Amendment
gave him.  The ballot, which before he had looked upon as a visible
sign of freedom, he now regarded as the chief means of gaining and
perfecting the liberty with which war had partially endowed him.  And
why not?  Had not votes made war and emancipated millions?  Had not
votes enfranchised the freedmen?  Was anything impossible to a power
that had done all this?  A million black men started with renewed zeal
to vote themselves into the kingdom.  So the decade flew away, the
revolution of 1876 came, and left the half-free serf weary, wondering,
but still inspired.  Slowly but steadily, in the following years, a new
vision began gradually to replace the dream of political power,--a
powerful movement, the rise of another ideal to guide the unguided,
another pillar of fire by night after a clouded day.  It was the ideal
of "book-learning"; the curiosity, born of compulsory ignorance, to
know and test the power of the cabalistic letters of the white man, the
longing to know.  Here at last seemed to have been discovered the
mountain path to Canaan; longer than the highway of Emancipation and
law, steep and rugged, but straight, leading to heights high enough to
overlook life.

Up the new path the advance guard toiled, slowly, heavily, doggedly;
only those who have watched and guided the faltering feet, the misty
minds, the dull understandings, of the dark pupils of these schools
know how faithfully, how piteously, this people strove to learn.  It
was weary work.  The cold statistician wrote down the inches of
progress here and there, noted also where here and there a foot had
slipped or some one had fallen.  To the tired climbers, the horizon was
ever dark, the mists were often cold, the Canaan was always dim and far
away.  If, however, the vistas disclosed as yet no goal, no
resting-place, little but flattery and criticism, the journey at least
gave leisure for reflection and self-examination; it changed the child
of Emancipation to the youth with dawning self-consciousness,
self-realization, self-respect.  In those sombre forests of his
striving his own soul rose before him, and he saw himself,--darkly as
through a veil; and yet he saw in himself some faint revelation of his
power, of his mission.  He began to have a dim feeling that, to attain
his place in the world, he must be himself, and not another.  For the
first time he sought to analyze the burden he bore upon his back, that
dead-weight of social degradation partially masked behind a half-named
Negro problem.  He felt his poverty; without a cent, without a home,
without land, tools, or savings, he had entered into competition with
rich, landed, skilled neighbors.  To be a poor man is hard, but to be a
poor race in a land of dollars is the very bottom of hardships.  He
felt the weight of his ignorance,--not simply of letters, but of life,
of business, of the humanities; the accumulated sloth and shirking and
awkwardness of decades and centuries shackled his hands and feet.  Nor
was his burden all poverty and ignorance.  The red stain of bastardy,
which two centuries of systematic legal defilement of Negro women had
stamped upon his race, meant not only the loss of ancient African
chastity, but also the hereditary weight of a mass of corruption from
white adulterers, threatening almost the obliteration of the Negro home.

A people thus handicapped ought not to be asked to race with the world,
but rather allowed to give all its time and thought to its own social
problems.  But alas! while sociologists gleefully count his bastards
and his prostitutes, the very soul of the toiling, sweating black man
is darkened by the shadow of a vast despair.  Men call the shadow
prejudice, and learnedly explain it as the natural defence of culture
against barbarism, learning against ignorance, purity against crime,
the "higher" against the "lower" races.  To which the Negro cries Amen!
and swears that to so much of this strange prejudice as is founded on
just homage to civilization, culture, righteousness, and progress, he
humbly bows and meekly does obeisance.  But before that nameless
prejudice that leaps beyond all this he stands helpless, dismayed, and
well-nigh speechless; before that personal disrespect and mockery, the
ridicule and systematic humiliation, the distortion of fact and wanton
license of fancy, the cynical ignoring of the better and the boisterous
welcoming of the worse, the all-pervading desire to inculcate disdain
for everything black, from Toussaint to the devil,--before this there
rises a sickening despair that would disarm and discourage any nation
save that black host to whom "discouragement" is an unwritten word.

But the facing of so vast a prejudice could not but bring the
inevitable self-questioning, self-disparagement, and lowering of ideals
which ever accompany repression and breed in an atmosphere of contempt
and hate.  Whisperings and portents came home upon the four winds: Lo!
we are diseased and dying, cried the dark hosts; we cannot write, our
voting is vain; what need of education, since we must always cook and
serve?  And the Nation echoed and enforced this self-criticism, saying:
Be content to be servants, and nothing more; what need of higher
culture for half-men?  Away with the black man's ballot, by force or
fraud,--and behold the suicide of a race!  Nevertheless, out of the
evil came something of good,--the more careful adjustment of education
to real life, the clearer perception of the Negroes' social
responsibilities, and the sobering realization of the meaning of
progress.

So dawned the time of Sturm und Drang: storm and stress to-day rocks
our little boat on the mad waters of the world-sea; there is within and
without the sound of conflict, the burning of body and rending of soul;
inspiration strives with doubt, and faith with vain questionings.  The
bright ideals of the past,--physical freedom, political power, the
training of brains and the training of hands,--all these in turn have
waxed and waned, until even the last grows dim and overcast.  Are they
all wrong,--all false?  No, not that, but each alone was over-simple
and incomplete,--the dreams of a credulous race-childhood, or the fond
imaginings of the other world which does not know and does not want to
know our power.  To be really true, all these ideals must be melted and
welded into one.  The training of the schools we need to-day more than
ever,--the training of deft hands, quick eyes and ears, and above all
the broader, deeper, higher culture of gifted minds and pure hearts.
The power of the ballot we need in sheer self-defence,--else what shall
save us from a second slavery?  Freedom, too, the long-sought, we still
seek,--the freedom of life and limb, the freedom to work and think, the
freedom to love and aspire.  Work, culture, liberty,--all these we
need, not singly but together, not successively but together, each
growing and aiding each, and all striving toward that vaster ideal that
swims before the Negro people, the ideal of human brotherhood, gained
through the unifying ideal of Race; the ideal of fostering and
developing the traits and talents of the Negro, not in opposition to or
contempt for other races, but rather in large conformity to the greater
ideals of the American Republic, in order that some day on American
soil two world-races may give each to each those characteristics both
so sadly lack.  We the darker ones come even now not altogether
empty-handed: there are to-day no truer exponents of the pure human
spirit of the Declaration of Independence than the American Negroes;
there is no true American music but the wild sweet melodies of the
Negro slave; the American fairy tales and folklore are Indian and
African; and, all in all, we black men seem the sole oasis of simple
faith and reverence in a dusty desert of dollars and smartness.  Will
America be poorer if she replace her brutal dyspeptic blundering with
light-hearted but determined Negro humility? or her coarse and cruel
wit with loving jovial good-humor? or her vulgar music with the soul of
the Sorrow Songs?

Merely a concrete test of the underlying principles of the great
republic is the Negro Problem, and the spiritual striving of the
freedmen's sons is the travail of souls whose burden is almost beyond
the measure of their strength, but who bear it in the name of an
historic race, in the name of this the land of their fathers' fathers,
and in the name of human opportunity.


And now what I have briefly sketched in large outline let me on coming
pages tell again in many ways, with loving emphasis and deeper detail,
that men may listen to the striving in the souls of black folk.




II

Of the Dawn of Freedom

  Careless seems the great Avenger;
    History's lessons but record
  One death-grapple in the darkness
    'Twixt old systems and the Word;
  Truth forever on the scaffold,
    Wrong forever on the throne;
  Yet that scaffold sways the future,
    And behind the dim unknown
  Standeth God within the shadow
    Keeping watch above His own.

  LOWELL.


The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the
color-line,--the relation of the darker to the lighter races of men in
Asia and Africa, in America and the islands of the sea.  It was a phase
of this problem that caused the Civil War; and however much they who
marched South and North in 1861 may have fixed on the technical points,
of union and local autonomy as a shibboleth, all nevertheless knew, as
we know, that the question of Negro slavery was the real cause of the
conflict.  Curious it was, too, how this deeper question ever forced
itself to the surface despite effort and disclaimer.  No sooner had
Northern armies touched Southern soil than this old question, newly
guised, sprang from the earth,--What shall be done with Negroes?
Peremptory military commands this way and that, could not answer the
query; the Emancipation Proclamation seemed but to broaden and
intensify the difficulties; and the War Amendments made the Negro
problems of to-day.

It is the aim of this essay to study the period of history from 1861 to
1872 so far as it relates to the American Negro.  In effect, this tale
of the dawn of Freedom is an account of that government of men called
the Freedmen's Bureau,--one of the most singular and interesting of the
attempts made by a great nation to grapple with vast problems of race
and social condition.

The war has naught to do with slaves, cried Congress, the President,
and the Nation; and yet no sooner had the armies, East and West,
penetrated Virginia and Tennessee than fugitive slaves appeared within
their lines.  They came at night, when the flickering camp-fires shone
like vast unsteady stars along the black horizon: old men and thin,
with gray and tufted hair; women with frightened eyes, dragging
whimpering hungry children; men and girls, stalwart and gaunt,--a horde
of starving vagabonds, homeless, helpless, and pitiable, in their dark
distress.  Two methods of treating these newcomers seemed equally
logical to opposite sorts of minds.  Ben Butler, in Virginia, quickly
declared slave property contraband of war, and put the fugitives to
work; while Fremont, in Missouri, declared the slaves free under
martial law.  Butler's action was approved, but Fremont's was hastily
countermanded, and his successor, Halleck, saw things differently.
"Hereafter," he commanded, "no slaves should be allowed to come into
your lines at all; if any come without your knowledge, when owners call
for them deliver them."  Such a policy was difficult to enforce; some
of the black refugees declared themselves freemen, others showed that
their masters had deserted them, and still others were captured with
forts and plantations.  Evidently, too, slaves were a source of
strength to the Confederacy, and were being used as laborers and
producers.  "They constitute a military resource," wrote Secretary
Cameron, late in 1861; "and being such, that they should not be turned
over to the enemy is too plain to discuss."  So gradually the tone of
the army chiefs changed; Congress forbade the rendition of fugitives,
and Butler's "contrabands" were welcomed as military laborers.  This
complicated rather than solved the problem, for now the scattering
fugitives became a steady stream, which flowed faster as the armies
marched.

Then the long-headed man with care-chiselled face who sat in the White
House saw the inevitable, and emancipated the slaves of rebels on New
Year's, 1863.  A month later Congress called earnestly for the Negro
soldiers whom the act of July, 1862, had half grudgingly allowed to
enlist.  Thus the barriers were levelled and the deed was done.  The
stream of fugitives swelled to a flood, and anxious army officers kept
inquiring: "What must be done with slaves, arriving almost daily?  Are
we to find food and shelter for women and children?"

It was a Pierce of Boston who pointed out the way, and thus became in a
sense the founder of the Freedmen's Bureau.  He was a firm friend of
Secretary Chase; and when, in 1861, the care of slaves and abandoned
lands devolved upon the Treasury officials, Pierce was specially
detailed from the ranks to study the conditions.  First, he cared for
the refugees at Fortress Monroe; and then, after Sherman had captured
Hilton Head, Pierce was sent there to found his Port Royal experiment
of making free workingmen out of slaves.  Before his experiment was
barely started, however, the problem of the fugitives had assumed such
proportions that it was taken from the hands of the over-burdened
Treasury Department and given to the army officials.  Already centres
of massed freedmen were forming at Fortress Monroe, Washington, New
Orleans, Vicksburg and Corinth, Columbus, Ky., and Cairo, Ill., as well
as at Port Royal.  Army chaplains found here new and fruitful fields;
"superintendents of contrabands" multiplied, and some attempt at
systematic work was made by enlisting the able-bodied men and giving
work to the others.

Then came the Freedmen's Aid societies, born of the touching appeals
from Pierce and from these other centres of distress.  There was the
American Missionary Association, sprung from the Amistad, and now
full-grown for work; the various church organizations, the National
Freedmen's Relief Association, the American Freedmen's Union, the
Western Freedmen's Aid Commission,--in all fifty or more active
organizations, which sent clothes, money, school-books, and teachers
southward.  All they did was needed, for the destitution of the
freedmen was often reported as "too appalling for belief," and the
situation was daily growing worse rather than better.

And daily, too, it seemed more plain that this was no ordinary matter
of temporary relief, but a national crisis; for here loomed a labor
problem of vast dimensions.  Masses of Negroes stood idle, or, if they
worked spasmodically, were never sure of pay; and if perchance they
received pay, squandered the new thing thoughtlessly.  In these and
other ways were camp-life and the new liberty demoralizing the
freedmen.  The broader economic organization thus clearly demanded
sprang up here and there as accident and local conditions determined.
Here it was that Pierce's Port Royal plan of leased plantations and
guided workmen pointed out the rough way.  In Washington the military
governor, at the urgent appeal of the superintendent, opened
confiscated estates to the cultivation of the fugitives, and there in
the shadow of the dome gathered black farm villages.  General Dix gave
over estates to the freedmen of Fortress Monroe, and so on, South and
West.  The government and benevolent societies furnished the means of
cultivation, and the Negro turned again slowly to work.  The systems of
control, thus started, rapidly grew, here and there, into strange
little governments, like that of General Banks in Louisiana, with its
ninety thousand black subjects, its fifty thousand guided laborers, and
its annual budget of one hundred thousand dollars and more.  It made
out four thousand pay-rolls a year, registered all freedmen, inquired
into grievances and redressed them, laid and collected taxes, and
established a system of public schools.  So, too, Colonel Eaton, the
superintendent of Tennessee and Arkansas, ruled over one hundred
thousand freedmen, leased and cultivated seven thousand acres of cotton
land, and fed ten thousand paupers a year.  In South Carolina was
General Saxton, with his deep interest in black folk.  He succeeded
Pierce and the Treasury officials, and sold forfeited estates, leased
abandoned plantations, encouraged schools, and received from Sherman,
after that terribly picturesque march to the sea, thousands of the
wretched camp followers.

Three characteristic things one might have seen in Sherman's raid
through Georgia, which threw the new situation in shadowy relief: the
Conqueror, the Conquered, and the Negro.  Some see all significance in
the grim front of the destroyer, and some in the bitter sufferers of
the Lost Cause.  But to me neither soldier nor fugitive speaks with so
deep a meaning as that dark human cloud that clung like remorse on the
rear of those swift columns, swelling at times to half their size,
almost engulfing and choking them.  In vain were they ordered back, in
vain were bridges hewn from beneath their feet; on they trudged and
writhed and surged, until they rolled into Savannah, a starved and
naked horde of tens of thousands.  There too came the characteristic
military remedy: "The islands from Charleston south, the abandoned
rice-fields along the rivers for thirty miles back from the sea, and
the country bordering the St. John's River, Florida, are reserved and
set apart for the settlement of Negroes now made free by act of war."
So read the celebrated "Field-order Number Fifteen."

All these experiments, orders, and systems were bound to attract and
perplex the government and the nation.  Directly after the Emancipation
Proclamation, Representative Eliot had introduced a bill creating a
Bureau of Emancipation; but it was never reported.  The following June
a committee of inquiry, appointed by the Secretary of War, reported in
favor of a temporary bureau for the "improvement, protection, and
employment of refugee freedmen," on much the same lines as were
afterwards followed.  Petitions came in to President Lincoln from
distinguished citizens and organizations, strongly urging a
comprehensive and unified plan of dealing with the freedmen, under a
bureau which should be "charged with the study of plans and execution
of measures for easily guiding, and in every way judiciously and
humanely aiding, the passage of our emancipated and yet to be
emancipated blacks from the old condition of forced labor to their new
state of voluntary industry."

Some half-hearted steps were taken to accomplish this, in part, by
putting the whole matter again in charge of the special Treasury
agents.  Laws of 1863 and 1864 directed them to take charge of and
lease abandoned lands for periods not exceeding twelve months, and to
"provide in such leases, or otherwise, for the employment and general
welfare" of the freedmen.  Most of the army officers greeted this as a
welcome relief from perplexing "Negro affairs," and Secretary
Fessenden, July 29, 1864, issued an excellent system of regulations,
which were afterward closely followed by General Howard.  Under
Treasury agents, large quantities of land were leased in the
Mississippi Valley, and many Negroes were employed; but in August,
1864, the new regulations were suspended for reasons of "public
policy," and the army was again in control.

Meanwhile Congress had turned its attention to the subject; and in
March the House passed a bill by a majority of two establishing a
Bureau for Freedmen in the War Department.  Charles Sumner, who had
charge of the bill in the Senate, argued that freedmen and abandoned
lands ought to be under the same department, and reported a substitute
for the House bill attaching the Bureau to the Treasury Department.
This bill passed, but too late for action by the House.  The debates
wandered over the whole policy of the administration and the general
question of slavery, without touching very closely the specific merits
of the measure in hand.  Then the national election took place; and the
administration, with a vote of renewed confidence from the country,
addressed itself to the matter more seriously.  A conference between
the two branches of Congress agreed upon a carefully drawn measure
which contained the chief provisions of Sumner's bill, but made the
proposed organization a department independent of both the War and the
Treasury officials.  The bill was conservative, giving the new
department "general superintendence of all freedmen."  Its purpose was
to "establish regulations" for them, protect them, lease them lands,
adjust their wages, and appear in civil and military courts as their
"next friend." There were many limitations attached to the powers thus
granted, and the organization was made permanent.  Nevertheless, the
Senate defeated the bill, and a new conference committee was appointed.
This committee reported a new bill, February 28, which was whirled
through just as the session closed, and became the act of 1865
establishing in the War Department a "Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and
Abandoned Lands."

This last compromise was a hasty bit of legislation, vague and
uncertain in outline.  A Bureau was created, "to continue during the
present War of Rebellion, and for one year thereafter," to which was
given "the supervision and management of all abandoned lands and the
control of all subjects relating to refugees and freedmen," under "such
rules and regulations as may be presented by the head of the Bureau and
approved by the President."  A Commissioner, appointed by the President
and Senate, was to control the Bureau, with an office force not
exceeding ten clerks.  The President might also appoint assistant
commissioners in the seceded States, and to all these offices military
officials might be detailed at regular pay.  The Secretary of War could
issue rations, clothing, and fuel to the destitute, and all abandoned
property was placed in the hands of the Bureau for eventual lease and
sale to ex-slaves in forty-acre parcels.

Thus did the United States government definitely assume charge of the
emancipated Negro as the ward of the nation.  It was a tremendous
undertaking.  Here at a stroke of the pen was erected a government of
millions of men,--and not ordinary men either, but black men
emasculated by a peculiarly complete system of slavery, centuries old;
and now, suddenly, violently, they come into a new birthright, at a
time of war and passion, in the midst of the stricken and embittered
population of their former masters.  Any man might well have hesitated
to assume charge of such a work, with vast responsibilities, indefinite
powers, and limited resources.  Probably no one but a soldier would
have answered such a call promptly; and, indeed, no one but a soldier
could be called, for Congress had appropriated no money for salaries
and expenses.

Less than a month after the weary Emancipator passed to his rest, his
successor assigned Major-Gen. Oliver O. Howard to duty as Commissioner
of the new Bureau.  He was a Maine man, then only thirty-five years of
age.  He had marched with Sherman to the sea, had fought well at
Gettysburg, and but the year before had been assigned to the command of
the Department of Tennessee.  An honest man, with too much faith in
human nature, little aptitude for business and intricate detail, he had
had large opportunity of becoming acquainted at first hand with much of
the work before him.  And of that work it has been truly said that "no
approximately correct history of civilization can ever be written which
does not throw out in bold relief, as one of the great landmarks of
political and social progress, the organization and administration of
the Freedmen's Bureau."

On May 12, 1865, Howard was appointed; and he assumed the duties of his
office promptly on the 15th, and began examining the field of work.  A
curious mess he looked upon: little despotisms, communistic
experiments, slavery, peonage, business speculations, organized
charity, unorganized almsgiving,--all reeling on under the guise of
helping the freedmen, and all enshrined in the smoke and blood of the
war and the cursing and silence of angry men.  On May 19 the new
government--for a government it really was--issued its constitution;
commissioners were to be appointed in each of the seceded states, who
were to take charge of "all subjects relating to refugees and
freedmen," and all relief and rations were to be given by their consent
alone.  The Bureau invited continued cooperation with benevolent
societies, and declared: "It will be the object of all commissioners to
introduce practicable systems of compensated labor," and to establish
schools.  Forthwith nine assistant commissioners were appointed.  They
were to hasten to their fields of work; seek gradually to close relief
establishments, and make the destitute self-supporting; act as courts
of law where there were no courts, or where Negroes were not recognized
in them as free; establish the institution of marriage among ex-slaves,
and keep records; see that freedmen were free to choose their
employers, and help in making fair contracts for them; and finally, the
circular said: "Simple good faith, for which we hope on all hands for
those concerned in the passing away of slavery, will especially relieve
the assistant commissioners in the discharge of their duties toward the
freedmen, as well as promote the general welfare."

No sooner was the work thus started, and the general system and local
organization in some measure begun, than two grave difficulties
appeared which changed largely the theory and outcome of Bureau work.
First, there were the abandoned lands of the South.  It had long been
the more or less definitely expressed theory of the North that all the
chief problems of Emancipation might be settled by establishing the
slaves on the forfeited lands of their masters,--a sort of poetic
justice, said some.  But this poetry done into solemn prose meant
either wholesale confiscation of private property in the South, or vast
appropriations.  Now Congress had not appropriated a cent, and no
sooner did the proclamations of general amnesty appear than the eight
hundred thousand acres of abandoned lands in the hands of the
Freedmen's Bureau melted quickly away.  The second difficulty lay in
perfecting the local organization of the Bureau throughout the wide
field of work.  Making a new machine and sending out officials of duly
ascertained fitness for a great work of social reform is no child's
task; but this task was even harder, for a new central organization had
to be fitted on a heterogeneous and confused but already existing
system of relief and control of ex-slaves; and the agents available for
this work must be sought for in an army still busy with war
operations,--men in the very nature of the case ill fitted for delicate
social work,--or among the questionable camp followers of an invading
host.  Thus, after a year's work, vigorously as it was pushed, the
problem looked even more difficult to grasp and solve than at the
beginning.  Nevertheless, three things that year's work did, well worth
the doing: it relieved a vast amount of physical suffering; it
transported seven thousand fugitives from congested centres back to the
farm; and, best of all, it inaugurated the crusade of the New England
schoolma'am.

The annals of this Ninth Crusade are yet to be written,--the tale of a
mission that seemed to our age far more quixotic than the quest of St.
Louis seemed to his.  Behind the mists of ruin and rapine waved the
calico dresses of women who dared, and after the hoarse mouthings of
the field guns rang the rhythm of the alphabet.  Rich and poor they
were, serious and curious.  Bereaved now of a father, now of a brother,
now of more than these, they came seeking a life work in planting New
England schoolhouses among the white and black of the South.  They did
their work well.  In that first year they taught one hundred thousand
souls, and more.

Evidently, Congress must soon legislate again on the hastily organized
Bureau, which had so quickly grown into wide significance and vast
possibilities.  An institution such as that was well-nigh as difficult
to end as to begin.  Early in 1866 Congress took up the matter, when
Senator Trumbull, of Illinois, introduced a bill to extend the Bureau
and enlarge its powers.  This measure received, at the hands of
Congress, far more thorough discussion and attention than its
predecessor.  The war cloud had thinned enough to allow a clearer
conception of the work of Emancipation.  The champions of the bill
argued that the strengthening of the Freedmen's Bureau was still a
military necessity; that it was needed for the proper carrying out of
the Thirteenth Amendment, and was a work of sheer justice to the
ex-slave, at a trifling cost to the government.  The opponents of the
measure declared that the war was over, and the necessity for war
measures past; that the Bureau, by reason of its extraordinary powers,
was clearly unconstitutional in time of peace, and was destined to
irritate the South and pauperize the freedmen, at a final cost of
possibly hundreds of millions.  These two arguments were unanswered,
and indeed unanswerable: the one that the extraordinary powers of the
Bureau threatened the civil rights of all citizens; and the other that
the government must have power to do what manifestly must be done, and
that present abandonment of the freedmen meant their practical
reenslavement.  The bill which finally passed enlarged and made
permanent the Freedmen's Bureau.  It was promptly vetoed by President
Johnson as "unconstitutional," "unnecessary," and "extrajudicial," and
failed of passage over the veto.  Meantime, however, the breach between
Congress and the President began to broaden, and a modified form of the
lost bill was finally passed over the President's second veto, July 16.

The act of 1866 gave the Freedmen's Bureau its final form,--the form by
which it will be known to posterity and judged of men.  It extended the
existence of the Bureau to July, 1868; it authorized additional
assistant commissioners, the retention of army officers mustered out of
regular service, the sale of certain forfeited lands to freedmen on
nominal terms, the sale of Confederate public property for Negro
schools, and a wider field of judicial interpretation and cognizance.
The government of the unreconstructed South was thus put very largely
in the hands of the Freedmen's Bureau, especially as in many cases the
departmental military commander was now made also assistant
commissioner.  It was thus that the Freedmen's Bureau became a
full-fledged government of men.  It made laws, executed them and
interpreted them; it laid and collected taxes, defined and punished
crime, maintained and used military force, and dictated such measures
as it thought necessary and proper for the accomplishment of its varied
ends.  Naturally, all these powers were not exercised continuously nor
to their fullest extent; and yet, as General Howard has said, "scarcely
any subject that has to be legislated upon in civil society failed, at
one time or another, to demand the action of this singular Bureau."

To understand and criticise intelligently so vast a work, one must not
forget an instant the drift of things in the later sixties.  Lee had
surrendered, Lincoln was dead, and Johnson and Congress were at
loggerheads; the Thirteenth Amendment was adopted, the Fourteenth
pending, and the Fifteenth declared in force in 1870.  Guerrilla
raiding, the ever-present flickering after-flame of war, was spending
its forces against the Negroes, and all the Southern land was awakening
as from some wild dream to poverty and social revolution.  In a time of
perfect calm, amid willing neighbors and streaming wealth, the social
uplifting of four million slaves to an assured and self-sustaining
place in the body politic and economic would have been a herculean
task; but when to the inherent difficulties of so delicate and nice a
social operation were added the spite and hate of conflict, the hell of
war; when suspicion and cruelty were rife, and gaunt Hunger wept beside
Bereavement,--in such a case, the work of any instrument of social
regeneration was in large part foredoomed to failure.  The very name of
the Bureau stood for a thing in the South which for two centuries and
better men had refused even to argue,--that life amid free Negroes was
simply unthinkable, the maddest of experiments.

The agents that the Bureau could command varied all the way from
unselfish philanthropists to narrow-minded busybodies and thieves; and
even though it be true that the average was far better than the worst,
it was the occasional fly that helped spoil the ointment.

Then amid all crouched the freed slave, bewildered between friend and
foe.  He had emerged from slavery,--not the worst slavery in the world,
not a slavery that made all life unbearable, rather a slavery that had
here and there something of kindliness, fidelity, and happiness,--but
withal slavery, which, so far as human aspiration and desert were
concerned, classed the black man and the ox together.  And the Negro
knew full well that, whatever their deeper convictions may have been,
Southern men had fought with desperate energy to perpetuate this
slavery under which the black masses, with half-articulate thought, had
writhed and shivered.  They welcomed freedom with a cry.  They shrank
from the master who still strove for their chains; they fled to the
friends that had freed them, even though those friends stood ready to
use them as a club for driving the recalcitrant South back into
loyalty.  So the cleft between the white and black South grew.  Idle to
say it never should have been; it was as inevitable as its results were
pitiable.  Curiously incongruous elements were left arrayed against
each other,--the North, the government, the carpet-bagger, and the
slave, here; and there, all the South that was white, whether gentleman
or vagabond, honest man or rascal, lawless murderer or martyr to duty.

Thus it is doubly difficult to write of this period calmly, so intense
was the feeling, so mighty the human passions that swayed and blinded
men.  Amid it all, two figures ever stand to typify that day to coming
ages,--the one, a gray-haired gentleman, whose fathers had quit
themselves like men, whose sons lay in nameless graves; who bowed to
the evil of slavery because its abolition threatened untold ill to all;
who stood at last, in the evening of life, a blighted, ruined form,
with hate in his eyes;--and the other, a form hovering dark and
mother-like, her awful face black with the mists of centuries, had
aforetime quailed at that white master's command, had bent in love over
the cradles of his sons and daughters, and closed in death the sunken
eyes of his wife,--aye, too, at his behest had laid herself low to his
lust, and borne a tawny man-child to the world, only to see her dark
boy's limbs scattered to the winds by midnight marauders riding after
"damned Niggers."  These were the saddest sights of that woful day; and
no man clasped the hands of these two passing figures of the
present-past; but, hating, they went to their long home, and, hating,
their children's children live today.

Here, then, was the field of work for the Freedmen's Bureau; and since,
with some hesitation, it was continued by the act of 1868 until 1869,
let us look upon four years of its work as a whole.  There were, in
1868, nine hundred Bureau officials scattered from Washington to Texas,
ruling, directly and indirectly, many millions of men.  The deeds of
these rulers fall mainly under seven heads: the relief of physical
suffering, the overseeing of the beginnings of free labor, the buying
and selling of land, the establishment of schools, the paying of
bounties, the administration of justice, and the financiering of all
these activities.

Up to June, 1869, over half a million patients had been treated by
Bureau physicians and surgeons, and sixty hospitals and asylums had
been in operation.  In fifty months twenty-one million free rations
were distributed at a cost of over four million dollars.  Next came the
difficult question of labor.  First, thirty thousand black men were
transported from the refuges and relief stations back to the farms,
back to the critical trial of a new way of working.  Plain instructions
went out from Washington: the laborers must be free to choose their
employers, no fixed rate of wages was prescribed, and there was to be
no peonage or forced labor.  So far, so good; but where local agents
differed toto caelo in capacity and character, where the personnel was
continually changing, the outcome was necessarily varied.  The largest
element of success lay in the fact that the majority of the freedmen
were willing, even eager, to work.  So labor contracts were
written,--fifty thousand in a single State,--laborers advised, wages
guaranteed, and employers supplied.  In truth, the organization became
a vast labor bureau,--not perfect, indeed, notably defective here and
there, but on the whole successful beyond the dreams of thoughtful men.
The two great obstacles which confronted the officials were the tyrant
and the idler,--the slaveholder who was determined to perpetuate
slavery under another name; and, the freedman who regarded freedom as
perpetual rest,--the Devil and the Deep Sea.

In the work of establishing the Negroes as peasant proprietors, the
Bureau was from the first handicapped and at last absolutely checked.
Something was done, and larger things were planned; abandoned lands
were leased so long as they remained in the hands of the Bureau, and a
total revenue of nearly half a million dollars derived from black
tenants.  Some other lands to which the nation had gained title were
sold on easy terms, and public lands were opened for settlement to the
very few freedmen who had tools and capital.  But the vision of "forty
acres and a mule"--the righteous and reasonable ambition to become a
landholder, which the nation had all but categorically promised the
freedmen--was destined in most cases to bitter disappointment.  And
those men of marvellous hindsight who are today seeking to preach the
Negro back to the present peonage of the soil know well, or ought to
know, that the opportunity of binding the Negro peasant willingly to
the soil was lost on that day when the Commissioner of the Freedmen's
Bureau had to go to South Carolina and tell the weeping freedmen, after
their years of toil, that their land was not theirs, that there was a
mistake--somewhere.  If by 1874 the Georgia Negro alone owned three
hundred and fifty thousand acres of land, it was by grace of his thrift
rather than by bounty of the government.

The greatest success of the Freedmen's Bureau lay in the planting of
the free school among Negroes, and the idea of free elementary
education among all classes in the South.  It not only called the
school-mistresses through the benevolent agencies and built them
schoolhouses, but it helped discover and support such apostles of human
culture as Edmund Ware, Samuel Armstrong, and Erastus Cravath.  The
opposition to Negro education in the South was at first bitter, and
showed itself in ashes, insult, and blood; for the South believed an
educated Negro to be a dangerous Negro.  And the South was not wholly
wrong; for education among all kinds of men always has had, and always
will have, an element of danger and revolution, of dissatisfaction and
discontent.  Nevertheless, men strive to know.  Perhaps some inkling of
this paradox, even in the unquiet days of the Bureau, helped the
bayonets allay an opposition to human training which still to-day lies
smouldering in the South, but not flaming.  Fisk, Atlanta, Howard, and
Hampton were founded in these days, and six million dollars were
expended for educational work, seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars
of which the freedmen themselves gave of their poverty.

Such contributions, together with the buying of land and various other
enterprises, showed that the ex-slave was handling some free capital
already.  The chief initial source of this was labor in the army, and
his pay and bounty as a soldier.  Payments to Negro soldiers were at
first complicated by the ignorance of the recipients, and the fact that
the quotas of colored regiments from Northern States were largely
filled by recruits from the South, unknown to their fellow soldiers.
Consequently, payments were accompanied by such frauds that Congress,
by joint resolution in 1867, put the whole matter in the hands of the
Freedmen's Bureau.  In two years six million dollars was thus
distributed to five thousand claimants, and in the end the sum exceeded
eight million dollars.  Even in this system fraud was frequent; but
still the work put needed capital in the hands of practical paupers,
and some, at least, was well spent.

The most perplexing and least successful part of the Bureau's work lay
in the exercise of its judicial functions.  The regular Bureau court
consisted of one representative of the employer, one of the Negro, and
one of the Bureau.  If the Bureau could have maintained a perfectly
judicial attitude, this arrangement would have been ideal, and must in
time have gained confidence; but the nature of its other activities and
the character of its personnel prejudiced the Bureau in favor of the
black litigants, and led without doubt to much injustice and annoyance.
On the other hand, to leave the Negro in the hands of Southern courts
was impossible.  In a distracted land where slavery had hardly fallen,
to keep the strong from wanton abuse of the weak, and the weak from
gloating insolently over the half-shorn strength of the strong, was a
thankless, hopeless task.  The former masters of the land were
peremptorily ordered about, seized, and imprisoned, and punished over
and again, with scant courtesy from army officers.  The former slaves
were intimidated, beaten, raped, and butchered by angry and revengeful
men.  Bureau courts tended to become centres simply for punishing
whites, while the regular civil courts tended to become solely
institutions for perpetuating the slavery of blacks.  Almost every law
and method ingenuity could devise was employed by the legislatures to
reduce the Negroes to serfdom,--to make them the slaves of the State,
if not of individual owners; while the Bureau officials too often were
found striving to put the "bottom rail on top," and gave the freedmen a
power and independence which they could not yet use.  It is all well
enough for us of another generation to wax wise with advice to those
who bore the burden in the heat of the day.  It is full easy now to see
that the man who lost home, fortune, and family at a stroke, and saw
his land ruled by "mules and niggers," was really benefited by the
passing of slavery.  It is not difficult now to say to the young
freedman, cheated and cuffed about who has seen his father's head
beaten to a jelly and his own mother namelessly assaulted, that the
meek shall inherit the earth.  Above all, nothing is more convenient
than to heap on the Freedmen's Bureau all the evils of that evil day,
and damn it utterly for every mistake and blunder that was made.

All this is easy, but it is neither sensible nor just.  Someone had
blundered, but that was long before Oliver Howard was born; there was
criminal aggression and heedless neglect, but without some system of
control there would have been far more than there was.  Had that
control been from within, the Negro would have been re-enslaved, to all
intents and purposes.  Coming as the control did from without, perfect
men and methods would have bettered all things; and even with imperfect
agents and questionable methods, the work accomplished was not
undeserving of commendation.

 Such was the dawn of Freedom; such was the work of the
Freedmen's Bureau, which, summed up in brief, may be epitomized thus:
for some fifteen million dollars, beside the sums spent before 1865,
and the dole of benevolent societies, this Bureau set going a system of
free labor, established a beginning of peasant proprietorship, secured
the recognition of black freedmen before courts of law, and founded the
free common school in the South.  On the other hand, it failed to begin
the establishment of good-will between ex-masters and freedmen, to
guard its work wholly from paternalistic methods which discouraged
self-reliance, and to carry out to any considerable extent its implied
promises to furnish the freedmen with land.  Its successes were the
result of hard work, supplemented by the aid of philanthropists and the
eager striving of black men.  Its failures were the result of bad local
agents, the inherent difficulties of the work, and national neglect.

Such an institution, from its wide powers, great responsibilities,
large control of moneys, and generally conspicuous position, was
naturally open to repeated and bitter attack.  It sustained a searching
Congressional investigation at the instance of Fernando Wood in 1870.
Its archives and few remaining functions were with blunt discourtesy
transferred from Howard's control, in his absence, to the supervision
of Secretary of War Belknap in 1872, on the Secretary's recommendation.
Finally, in consequence of grave intimations of wrong-doing made by the
Secretary and his subordinates, General Howard was court-martialed in
1874.  In both of these trials the Commissioner of the Freedmen's
Bureau was officially exonerated from any wilful misdoing, and his work
commended.  Nevertheless, many unpleasant things were brought to
light,--the methods of transacting the business of the Bureau were
faulty; several cases of defalcation were proved, and other frauds
strongly suspected; there were some business transactions which savored
of dangerous speculation, if not dishonesty; and around it all lay the
smirch of the Freedmen's Bank.

Morally and practically, the Freedmen's Bank was part of the Freedmen's
Bureau, although it had no legal connection with it.  With the prestige
of the government back of it, and a directing board of unusual
respectability and national reputation, this banking institution had
made a remarkable start in the development of that thrift among black
folk which slavery had kept them from knowing.  Then in one sad day
came the crash,--all the hard-earned dollars of the freedmen
disappeared; but that was the least of the loss,--all the faith in
saving went too, and much of the faith in men; and that was a loss that
a Nation which to-day sneers at Negro shiftlessness has never yet made
good.  Not even ten additional years of slavery could have done so much
to throttle the thrift of the freedmen as the mismanagement and
bankruptcy of the series of savings banks chartered by the Nation for
their especial aid.  Where all the blame should rest, it is hard to
say; whether the Bureau and the Bank died chiefly by reason of the
blows of its selfish friends or the dark machinations of its foes,
perhaps even time will never reveal, for here lies unwritten history.

Of the foes without the Bureau, the bitterest were those who attacked
not so much its conduct or policy under the law as the necessity for
any such institution at all.  Such attacks came primarily from the
Border States and the South; and they were summed up by Senator Davis,
of Kentucky, when he moved to entitle the act of 1866 a bill "to
promote strife and conflict between the white and black races . . . by
a grant of unconstitutional power."  The argument gathered tremendous
strength South and North; but its very strength was its weakness.  For,
argued the plain common-sense of the nation, if it is unconstitutional,
unpractical, and futile for the nation to stand guardian over its
helpless wards, then there is left but one alternative,--to make those
wards their own guardians by arming them with the ballot.  Moreover,
the path of the practical politician pointed the same way; for, argued
this opportunist, if we cannot peacefully reconstruct the South with
white votes, we certainly can with black votes.  So justice and force
joined hands.

The alternative thus offered the nation was not between full and
restricted Negro suffrage; else every sensible man, black and white,
would easily have chosen the latter.  It was rather a choice between
suffrage and slavery, after endless blood and gold had flowed to sweep
human bondage away.  Not a single Southern legislature stood ready to
admit a Negro, under any conditions, to the polls; not a single
Southern legislature believed free Negro labor was possible without a
system of restrictions that took all its freedom away; there was
scarcely a white man in the South who did not honestly regard
Emancipation as a crime, and its practical nullification as a duty.  In
such a situation, the granting of the ballot to the black man was a
necessity, the very least a guilty nation could grant a wronged race,
and the only method of compelling the South to accept the results of
the war.  Thus Negro suffrage ended a civil war by beginning a race
feud.  And some felt gratitude toward the race thus sacrificed in its
swaddling clothes on the altar of national integrity; and some felt and
feel only indifference and contempt.

Had political exigencies been less pressing, the opposition to
government guardianship of Negroes less bitter, and the attachment to
the slave system less strong, the social seer can well imagine a far
better policy,--a permanent Freedmen's Bureau, with a national system
of Negro schools; a carefully supervised employment and labor office; a
system of impartial protection before the regular courts; and such
institutions for social betterment as savings-banks, land and building
associations, and social settlements.  All this vast expenditure of
money and brains might have formed a great school of prospective
citizenship, and solved in a way we have not yet solved the most
perplexing and persistent of the Negro problems.

That such an institution was unthinkable in 1870 was due in part to
certain acts of the Freedmen's Bureau itself.  It came to regard its
work as merely temporary, and Negro suffrage as a final answer to all
present perplexities.  The political ambition of many of its agents and
proteges led it far afield into questionable activities, until the
South, nursing its own deep prejudices, came easily to ignore all the
good deeds of the Bureau and hate its very name with perfect hatred.
So the Freedmen's Bureau died, and its child was the Fifteenth
Amendment.

The passing of a great human institution before its work is done, like
the untimely passing of a single soul, but leaves a legacy of striving
for other men.  The legacy of the Freedmen's Bureau is the heavy
heritage of this generation.  To-day, when new and vaster problems are
destined to strain every fibre of the national mind and soul, would it
not be well to count this legacy honestly and carefully?  For this much
all men know: despite compromise, war, and struggle, the Negro is not
free.  In the backwoods of the Gulf States, for miles and miles, he may
not leave the plantation of his birth; in well-nigh the whole rural
South the black farmers are peons, bound by law and custom to an
economic slavery, from which the only escape is death or the
penitentiary.  In the most cultured sections and cities of the South
the Negroes are a segregated servile caste, with restricted rights and
privileges.  Before the courts, both in law and custom, they stand on a
different and peculiar basis.  Taxation without representation is the
rule of their political life.  And the result of all this is, and in
nature must have been, lawlessness and crime.  That is the large legacy
of the Freedmen's Bureau, the work it did not do because it could not.


I have seen a land right merry with the sun, where children sing, and
rolling hills lie like passioned women wanton with harvest.  And there
in the King's Highways sat and sits a figure veiled and bowed, by which
the traveller's footsteps hasten as they go.  On the tainted air broods
fear.  Three centuries' thought has been the raising and unveiling of
that bowed human heart, and now behold a century new for the duty and
the deed.  The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the
color-line.




III

Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others

  From birth till death enslaved; in word, in deed, unmanned!
  *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
  Hereditary bondsmen!  Know ye not
  Who would be free themselves must strike the blow?

  BYRON.

Easily the most striking thing in the history of the American Negro
since 1876 is the ascendancy of Mr. Booker T. Washington.  It began at
the time when war memories and ideals were rapidly passing; a day of
astonishing commercial development was dawning; a sense of doubt and
hesitation overtook the freedmen's sons,--then it was that his leading
began.  Mr. Washington came, with a simple definite programme, at the
psychological moment when the nation was a little ashamed of having
bestowed so much sentiment on Negroes, and was concentrating its
energies on Dollars.  His programme of industrial education,
conciliation of the South, and submission and silence as to civil and
political rights, was not wholly original; the Free Negroes from 1830
up to war-time had striven to build industrial schools, and the
American Missionary Association had from the first taught various
trades; and Price and others had sought a way of honorable alliance
with the best of the Southerners.  But Mr. Washington first
indissolubly linked these things; he put enthusiasm, unlimited energy,
and perfect faith into his programme, and changed it from a by-path
into a veritable Way of Life.  And the tale of the methods by which he
did this is a fascinating study of human life.

It startled the nation to hear a Negro advocating such a programme
after many decades of bitter complaint; it startled and won the
applause of the South, it interested and won the admiration of the
North; and after a confused murmur of protest, it silenced if it did
not convert the Negroes themselves.

To gain the sympathy and cooperation of the various elements comprising
the white South was Mr. Washington's first task; and this, at the time
Tuskegee was founded, seemed, for a black man, well-nigh impossible.
And yet ten years later it was done in the word spoken at Atlanta: "In
all things purely social we can be as separate as the five fingers, and
yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress."  This
"Atlanta Compromise" is by all odds the most notable thing in Mr.
Washington's career.  The South interpreted it in different ways: the
radicals received it as a complete surrender of the demand for civil
and political equality; the conservatives, as a generously conceived
working basis for mutual understanding.  So both approved it, and
to-day its author is certainly the most distinguished Southerner since
Jefferson Davis, and the one with the largest personal following.

Next to this achievement comes Mr. Washington's work in gaining place
and consideration in the North.  Others less shrewd and tactful had
formerly essayed to sit on these two stools and had fallen between
them; but as Mr. Washington knew the heart of the South from birth and
training, so by singular insight he intuitively grasped the spirit of
the age which was dominating the North.  And so thoroughly did he learn
the speech and thought of triumphant commercialism, and the ideals of
material prosperity, that the picture of a lone black boy poring over a
French grammar amid the weeds and dirt of a neglected home soon seemed
to him the acme of absurdities.  One wonders what Socrates and St.
Francis of Assisi would say to this.

And yet this very singleness of vision and thorough oneness with his
age is a mark of the successful man.  It is as though Nature must needs
make men narrow in order to give them force.  So Mr. Washington's cult
has gained unquestioning followers, his work has wonderfully prospered,
his friends are legion, and his enemies are confounded.  To-day he
stands as the one recognized spokesman of his ten million fellows, and
one of the most notable figures in a nation of seventy millions.  One
hesitates, therefore, to criticise a life which, beginning with so
little, has done so much.  And yet the time is come when one may speak
in all sincerity and utter courtesy of the mistakes and shortcomings of
Mr. Washington's career, as well as of his triumphs, without being
thought captious or envious, and without forgetting that it is easier
to do ill than well in the world.

The criticism that has hitherto met Mr. Washington has not always been
of this broad character.  In the South especially has he had to walk
warily to avoid the harshest judgments,--and naturally so, for he is
dealing with the one subject of deepest sensitiveness to that section.
Twice--once when at the Chicago celebration of the Spanish-American War
he alluded to the color-prejudice that is "eating away the vitals of
the South," and once when he dined with President Roosevelt--has the
resulting Southern criticism been violent enough to threaten seriously
his popularity.  In the North the feeling has several times forced
itself into words, that Mr. Washington's counsels of submission
overlooked certain elements of true manhood, and that his educational
programme was unnecessarily narrow.  Usually, however, such criticism
has not found open expression, although, too, the spiritual sons of the
Abolitionists have not been prepared to acknowledge that the schools
founded before Tuskegee, by men of broad ideals and self-sacrificing
spirit, were wholly failures or worthy of ridicule.  While, then,
criticism has not failed to follow Mr. Washington, yet the prevailing
public opinion of the land has been but too willing to deliver the
solution of a wearisome problem into his hands, and say, "If that is
all you and your race ask, take it."

Among his own people, however, Mr. Washington has encountered the
strongest and most lasting opposition, amounting at times to
bitterness, and even today continuing strong and insistent even though
largely silenced in outward expression by the public opinion of the
nation.  Some of this opposition is, of course, mere envy; the
disappointment of displaced demagogues and the spite of narrow minds.
But aside from this, there is among educated and thoughtful colored men
in all parts of the land a feeling of deep regret, sorrow, and
apprehension at the wide currency and ascendancy which some of Mr.
Washington's theories have gained.  These same men admire his sincerity
of purpose, and are willing to forgive much to honest endeavor which is
doing something worth the doing.  They cooperate with Mr. Washington as
far as they conscientiously can; and, indeed, it is no ordinary tribute
to this man's tact and power that, steering as he must between so many
diverse interests and opinions, he so largely retains the respect of
all.

But the hushing of the criticism of honest opponents is a dangerous
thing.  It leads some of the best of the critics to unfortunate silence
and paralysis of effort, and others to burst into speech so
passionately and intemperately as to lose listeners.  Honest and
earnest criticism from those whose interests are most nearly
touched,--criticism of writers by readers,--this is the soul of
democracy and the safeguard of modern society.  If the best of the
American Negroes receive by outer pressure a leader whom they had not
recognized before, manifestly there is here a certain palpable gain.
Yet there is also irreparable loss,--a loss of that peculiarly valuable
education which a group receives when by search and criticism it finds
and commissions its own leaders.  The way in which this is done is at
once the most elementary and the nicest problem of social growth.
History is but the record of such group-leadership; and yet how
infinitely changeful is its type and character!  And of all types and
kinds, what can be more instructive than the leadership of a group
within a group?--that curious double movement where real progress may
be negative and actual advance be relative retrogression.  All this is
the social student's inspiration and despair.

Now in the past the American Negro has had instructive experience in
the choosing of group leaders, founding thus a peculiar dynasty which
in the light of present conditions is worth while studying.  When
sticks and stones and beasts form the sole environment of a people,
their attitude is largely one of determined opposition to and conquest
of natural forces.  But when to earth and brute is added an environment
of men and ideas, then the attitude of the imprisoned group may take
three main forms,--a feeling of revolt and revenge; an attempt to
adjust all thought and action to the will of the greater group; or,
finally, a determined effort at self-realization and self-development
despite environing opinion.  The influence of all of these attitudes at
various times can be traced in the history of the American Negro, and
in the evolution of his successive leaders.

Before 1750, while the fire of African freedom still burned in the
veins of the slaves, there was in all leadership or attempted
leadership but the one motive of revolt and revenge,--typified in the
terrible Maroons, the Danish blacks, and Cato of Stono, and veiling all
the Americas in fear of insurrection.  The liberalizing tendencies of
the latter half of the eighteenth century brought, along with kindlier
relations between black and white, thoughts of ultimate adjustment and
assimilation.  Such aspiration was especially voiced in the earnest
songs of Phyllis, in the martyrdom of Attucks, the fighting of Salem
and Poor, the intellectual accomplishments of Banneker and Derham, and
the political demands of the Cuffes.

Stern financial and social stress after the war cooled much of the
previous humanitarian ardor.  The disappointment and impatience of the
Negroes at the persistence of slavery and serfdom voiced itself in two
movements.  The slaves in the South, aroused undoubtedly by vague
rumors of the Haytian revolt, made three fierce attempts at
insurrection,--in 1800 under Gabriel in Virginia, in 1822 under Vesey
in Carolina, and in 1831 again in Virginia under the terrible Nat
Turner.  In the Free States, on the other hand, a new and curious
attempt at self-development was made.  In Philadelphia and New York
color-prescription led to a withdrawal of Negro communicants from white
churches and the formation of a peculiar socio-religious institution
among the Negroes known as the African Church,--an organization still
living and controlling in its various branches over a million of men.

Walker's wild appeal against the trend of the times showed how the
world was changing after the coming of the cotton-gin.  By 1830 slavery
seemed hopelessly fastened on the South, and the slaves thoroughly
cowed into submission.  The free Negroes of the North, inspired by the
mulatto immigrants from the West Indies, began to change the basis of
their demands; they recognized the slavery of slaves, but insisted that
they themselves were freemen, and sought assimilation and amalgamation
with the nation on the same terms with other men.  Thus, Forten and
Purvis of Philadelphia, Shad of Wilmington, Du Bois of New Haven,
Barbadoes of Boston, and others, strove singly and together as men,
they said, not as slaves; as "people of color," not as "Negroes."  The
trend of the times, however, refused them recognition save in
individual and exceptional cases, considered them as one with all the
despised blacks, and they soon found themselves striving to keep even
the rights they formerly had of voting and working and moving as
freemen.  Schemes of migration and colonization arose among them; but
these they refused to entertain, and they eventually turned to the
Abolition movement as a final refuge.

Here, led by Remond, Nell, Wells-Brown, and Douglass, a new period of
self-assertion and self-development dawned.  To be sure, ultimate
freedom and assimilation was the ideal before the leaders, but the
assertion of the manhood rights of the Negro by himself was the main
reliance, and John Brown's raid was the extreme of its logic.  After
the war and emancipation, the great form of Frederick Douglass, the
greatest of American Negro leaders, still led the host.
Self-assertion, especially in political lines, was the main programme,
and behind Douglass came Elliot, Bruce, and Langston, and the
Reconstruction politicians, and, less conspicuous but of greater social
significance, Alexander Crummell and Bishop Daniel Payne.

Then came the Revolution of 1876, the suppression of the Negro votes,
the changing and shifting of ideals, and the seeking of new lights in
the great night.  Douglass, in his old age, still bravely stood for the
ideals of his early manhood,--ultimate assimilation through
self-assertion, and on no other terms.  For a time Price arose as a new
leader, destined, it seemed, not to give up, but to re-state the old
ideals in a form less repugnant to the white South.  But he passed away
in his prime.  Then came the new leader.  Nearly all the former ones
had become leaders by the silent suffrage of their fellows, had sought
to lead their own people alone, and were usually, save Douglass, little
known outside their race.  But Booker T. Washington arose as
essentially the leader not of one race but of two,--a compromiser
between the South, the North, and the Negro.  Naturally the Negroes
resented, at first bitterly, signs of compromise which surrendered
their civil and political rights, even though this was to be exchanged
for larger chances of economic development.  The rich and dominating
North, however, was not only weary of the race problem, but was
investing largely in Southern enterprises, and welcomed any method of
peaceful cooperation.  Thus, by national opinion, the Negroes began to
recognize Mr. Washington's leadership; and the voice of criticism was
hushed.

Mr. Washington represents in Negro thought the old attitude of
adjustment and submission; but adjustment at such a peculiar time as to
make his programme unique.  This is an age of unusual economic
development, and Mr. Washington's programme naturally takes an economic
cast, becoming a gospel of Work and Money to such an extent as
apparently almost completely to overshadow the higher aims of life.
Moreover, this is an age when the more advanced races are coming in
closer contact with the less developed races, and the race-feeling is
therefore intensified; and Mr. Washington's programme practically
accepts the alleged inferiority of the Negro races.  Again, in our own
land, the reaction from the sentiment of war time has given impetus to
race-prejudice against Negroes, and Mr. Washington withdraws many of
the high demands of Negroes as men and American citizens.  In other
periods of intensified prejudice all the Negro's tendency to
self-assertion has been called forth; at this period a policy of
submission is advocated.  In the history of nearly all other races and
peoples the doctrine preached at such crises has been that manly
self-respect is worth more than lands and houses, and that a people who
voluntarily surrender such respect, or cease striving for it, are not
worth civilizing.

In answer to this, it has been claimed that the Negro can survive only
through submission.  Mr. Washington distinctly asks that black people
give up, at least for the present, three things,--

First, political power,

Second, insistence on civil rights,

Third, higher education of Negro youth,--and concentrate all their
energies on industrial education, and accumulation of wealth, and the
conciliation of the South.  This policy has been courageously and
insistently advocated for over fifteen years, and has been triumphant
for perhaps ten years.  As a result of this tender of the palm-branch,
what has been the return?  In these years there have occurred:

1.  The disfranchisement of the Negro.

2.  The legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for
the Negro.

3.  The steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher
training of the Negro.

These movements are not, to be sure, direct results of Mr. Washington's
teachings; but his propaganda has, without a shadow of doubt, helped
their speedier accomplishment.  The question then comes: Is it
possible, and probable, that nine millions of men can make effective
progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights,
made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meagre chance for
developing their exceptional men?  If history and reason give any
distinct answer to these questions, it is an emphatic NO.  And Mr.
Washington thus faces the triple paradox of his career:

1.  He is striving nobly to make Negro artisans business men and
property-owners; but it is utterly impossible, under modern competitive
methods, for workingmen and property-owners to defend their rights and
exist without the right of suffrage.

2.  He insists on thrift and self-respect, but at the same time
counsels a silent submission to civic inferiority such as is bound to
sap the manhood of any race in the long run.

3.  He advocates common-school and industrial training, and depreciates
institutions of higher learning; but neither the Negro common-schools,
nor Tuskegee itself, could remain open a day were it not for teachers
trained in Negro colleges, or trained by their graduates.

This triple paradox in Mr. Washington's position is the object of
criticism by two classes of colored Americans.  One class is
spiritually descended from Toussaint the Savior, through Gabriel,
Vesey, and Turner, and they represent the attitude of revolt and
revenge; they hate the white South blindly and distrust the white race
generally, and so far as they agree on definite action, think that the
Negro's only hope lies in emigration beyond the borders of the United
States.  And yet, by the irony of fate, nothing has more effectually
made this programme seem hopeless than the recent course of the United
States toward weaker and darker peoples in the West Indies, Hawaii, and
the Philippines,--for where in the world may we go and be safe from
lying and brute force?

The other class of Negroes who cannot agree with Mr. Washington has
hitherto said little aloud.  They deprecate the sight of scattered
counsels, of internal disagreement; and especially they dislike making
their just criticism of a useful and earnest man an excuse for a
general discharge of venom from small-minded opponents.  Nevertheless,
the questions involved are so fundamental and serious that it is
difficult to see how men like the Grimkes, Kelly Miller, J. W. E.
Bowen, and other representatives of this group, can much longer be
silent.  Such men feel in conscience bound to ask of this nation three
things:

1.  The right to vote.

2.  Civic equality.

3.  The education of youth according to ability.  They acknowledge Mr.
Washington's invaluable service in counselling patience and courtesy in
such demands; they do not ask that ignorant black men vote when
ignorant whites are debarred, or that any reasonable restrictions in
the suffrage should not be applied; they know that the low social level
of the mass of the race is responsible for much discrimination against
it, but they also know, and the nation knows, that relentless
color-prejudice is more often a cause than a result of the Negro's
degradation; they seek the abatement of this relic of barbarism, and
not its systematic encouragement and pampering by all agencies of
social power from the Associated Press to the Church of Christ.  They
advocate, with Mr. Washington, a broad system of Negro common schools
supplemented by thorough industrial training; but they are surprised
that a man of Mr. Washington's insight cannot see that no such
educational system ever has rested or can rest on any other basis than
that of the well-equipped college and university, and they insist that
there is a demand for a few such institutions throughout the South to
train the best of the Negro youth as teachers, professional men, and
leaders.

This group of men honor Mr. Washington for his attitude of conciliation
toward the white South; they accept the "Atlanta Compromise" in its
broadest interpretation; they recognize, with him, many signs of
promise, many men of high purpose and fair judgment, in this section;
they know that no easy task has been laid upon a region already
tottering under heavy burdens.  But, nevertheless, they insist that the
way to truth and right lies in straightforward honesty, not in
indiscriminate flattery; in praising those of the South who do well and
criticising uncompromisingly those who do ill; in taking advantage of
the opportunities at hand and urging their fellows to do the same, but
at the same time in remembering that only a firm adherence to their
higher ideals and aspirations will ever keep those ideals within the
realm of possibility.  They do not expect that the free right to vote,
to enjoy civic rights, and to be educated, will come in a moment; they
do not expect to see the bias and prejudices of years disappear at the
blast of a trumpet; but they are absolutely certain that the way for a
people to gain their reasonable rights is not by voluntarily throwing
them away and insisting that they do not want them; that the way for a
people to gain respect is not by continually belittling and ridiculing
themselves; that, on the contrary, Negroes must insist continually, in
season and out of season, that voting is necessary to modern manhood,
that color discrimination is barbarism, and that black boys need
education as well as white boys.

In failing thus to state plainly and unequivocally the legitimate
demands of their people, even at the cost of opposing an honored
leader, the thinking classes of American Negroes would shirk a heavy
responsibility,--a responsibility to themselves, a responsibility to
the struggling masses, a responsibility to the darker races of men
whose future depends so largely on this American experiment, but
especially a responsibility to this nation,--this common Fatherland.
It is wrong to encourage a man or a people in evil-doing; it is wrong
to aid and abet a national crime simply because it is unpopular not to
do so.  The growing spirit of kindliness and reconciliation between the
North and South after the frightful difference of a generation ago
ought to be a source of deep congratulation to all, and especially to
those whose mistreatment caused the war; but if that reconciliation is
to be marked by the industrial slavery and civic death of those same
black men, with permanent legislation into a position of inferiority,
then those black men, if they are really men, are called upon by every
consideration of patriotism and loyalty to oppose such a course by all
civilized methods, even though such opposition involves disagreement
with Mr. Booker T. Washington.  We have no right to sit silently by
while the inevitable seeds are sown for a harvest of disaster to our
children, black and white.

First, it is the duty of black men to judge the South discriminatingly.
The present generation of Southerners are not responsible for the past,
and they should not be blindly hated or blamed for it.  Furthermore, to
no class is the indiscriminate endorsement of the recent course of the
South toward Negroes more nauseating than to the best thought of the
South.  The South is not "solid"; it is a land in the ferment of social
change, wherein forces of all kinds are fighting for supremacy; and to
praise the ill the South is today perpetrating is just as wrong as to
condemn the good.  Discriminating and broad-minded criticism is what
the South needs,--needs it for the sake of her own white sons and
daughters, and for the insurance of robust, healthy mental and moral
development.

Today even the attitude of the Southern whites toward the blacks is
not, as so many assume, in all cases the same; the ignorant Southerner
hates the Negro, the workingmen fear his competition, the money-makers
wish to use him as a laborer, some of the educated see a menace in his
upward development, while others--usually the sons of the masters--wish
to help him to rise.  National opinion has enabled this last class to
maintain the Negro common schools, and to protect the Negro partially
in property, life, and limb.  Through the pressure of the money-makers,
the Negro is in danger of being reduced to semi-slavery, especially in
the country districts; the workingmen, and those of the educated who
fear the Negro, have united to disfranchise him, and some have urged
his deportation; while the passions of the ignorant are easily aroused
to lynch and abuse any black man.  To praise this intricate whirl of
thought and prejudice is nonsense; to inveigh indiscriminately against
"the South" is unjust; but to use the same breath in praising Governor
Aycock, exposing Senator Morgan, arguing with Mr. Thomas Nelson Page,
and denouncing Senator Ben Tillman, is not only sane, but the
imperative duty of thinking black men.

It would be unjust to Mr. Washington not to acknowledge that in several
instances he has opposed movements in the South which were unjust to
the Negro; he sent memorials to the Louisiana and Alabama
constitutional conventions, he has spoken against lynching, and in
other ways has openly or silently set his influence against sinister
schemes and unfortunate happenings.  Notwithstanding this, it is
equally true to assert that on the whole the distinct impression left
by Mr. Washington's propaganda is, first, that the South is justified
in its present attitude toward the Negro because of the Negro's
degradation; secondly, that the prime cause of the Negro's failure to
rise more quickly is his wrong education in the past; and, thirdly,
that his future rise depends primarily on his own efforts.  Each of
these propositions is a dangerous half-truth.  The supplementary truths
must never be lost sight of: first, slavery and race-prejudice are
potent if not sufficient causes of the Negro's position; second,
industrial and common-school training were necessarily slow in planting
because they had to await the black teachers trained by higher
institutions,--it being extremely doubtful if any essentially different
development was possible, and certainly a Tuskegee was unthinkable
before 1880; and, third, while it is a great truth to say that the
Negro must strive and strive mightily to help himself, it is equally
true that unless his striving be not simply seconded, but rather
aroused and encouraged, by the initiative of the richer and wiser
environing group, he cannot hope for great success.

In his failure to realize and impress this last point, Mr. Washington
is especially to be criticised.  His doctrine has tended to make the
whites, North and South, shift the burden of the Negro problem to the
Negro's shoulders and stand aside as critical and rather pessimistic
spectators; when in fact the burden belongs to the nation, and the
hands of none of us are clean if we bend not our energies to righting
these great wrongs.

The South ought to be led, by candid and honest criticism, to assert
her better self and do her full duty to the race she has cruelly
wronged and is still wronging.  The North--her co-partner in
guilt--cannot salve her conscience by plastering it with gold.  We
cannot settle this problem by diplomacy and suaveness, by "policy"
alone.  If worse come to worst, can the moral fibre of this country
survive the slow throttling and murder of nine millions of men?

The black men of America have a duty to perform, a duty stern and
delicate,--a forward movement to oppose a part of the work of their
greatest leader.  So far as Mr. Washington preaches Thrift, Patience,
and Industrial Training for the masses, we must hold up his hands and
strive with him, rejoicing in his honors and glorying in the strength
of this Joshua called of God and of man to lead the headless host.  But
so far as Mr. Washington apologizes for injustice, North or South, does
not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting, belittles the
emasculating effects of caste distinctions, and opposes the higher
training and ambition of our brighter minds,--so far as he, the South,
or the Nation, does this,--we must unceasingly and firmly oppose them.
By every civilized and peaceful method we must strive for the rights
which the world accords to men, clinging unwaveringly to those great
words which the sons of the Fathers would fain forget: "We hold these
truths to be self-evident: That all men are created equal; that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that
among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."




IV

Of the Meaning of Progress

  Willst Du Deine Macht verkunden,
  Wahle sie die frei von Sunden,
  Steh'n in Deinem ew'gen Haus!
  Deine Geister sende aus!
  Die Unsterblichen, die Reinen,
  Die nicht fuhlen, die nicht weinen!
  Nicht die zarte Jungfrau wahle,
  Nicht der Hirtin weiche Seele!

  SCHILLER.


Once upon a time I taught school in the hills of Tennessee, where the
broad dark vale of the Mississippi begins to roll and crumple to greet
the Alleghanies.  I was a Fisk student then, and all Fisk men thought
that Tennessee--beyond the Veil--was theirs alone, and in vacation time
they sallied forth in lusty bands to meet the county
school-commissioners.  Young and happy, I too went, and I shall not
soon forget that summer, seventeen years ago.

First, there was a Teachers' Institute at the county-seat; and there
distinguished guests of the superintendent taught the teachers
fractions and spelling and other mysteries,--white teachers in the
morning, Negroes at night.  A picnic now and then, and a supper, and
the rough world was softened by laughter and song.  I remember how--
But I wander.

There came a day when all the teachers left the Institute and began the
hunt for schools.  I learn from hearsay (for my mother was mortally
afraid of firearms) that the hunting of ducks and bears and men is
wonderfully interesting, but I am sure that the man who has never
hunted a country school has something to learn of the pleasures of the
chase.  I see now the white, hot roads lazily rise and fall and wind
before me under the burning July sun; I feel the deep weariness of
heart and limb as ten, eight, six miles stretch relentlessly ahead; I
feel my heart sink heavily as I hear again and again, "Got a teacher?
Yes."  So I walked on and on--horses were too expensive--until I had
wandered beyond railways, beyond stage lines, to a land of "varmints"
and rattlesnakes, where the coming of a stranger was an event, and men
lived and died in the shadow of one blue hill.

Sprinkled over hill and dale lay cabins and farmhouses, shut out from
the world by the forests and the rolling hills toward the east.  There
I found at last a little school.  Josie told me of it; she was a thin,
homely girl of twenty, with a dark-brown face and thick, hard hair.  I
had crossed the stream at Watertown, and rested under the great
willows; then I had gone to the little cabin in the lot where Josie was
resting on her way to town.  The gaunt farmer made me welcome, and
Josie, hearing my errand, told me anxiously that they wanted a school
over the hill; that but once since the war had a teacher been there;
that she herself longed to learn,--and thus she ran on, talking fast
and loud, with much earnestness and energy.

Next morning I crossed the tall round hill, lingered to look at the
blue and yellow mountains stretching toward the Carolinas, then plunged
into the wood, and came out at Josie's home.  It was a dull frame
cottage with four rooms, perched just below the brow of the hill, amid
peach-trees.  The father was a quiet, simple soul, calmly ignorant,
with no touch of vulgarity.  The mother was different,--strong,
bustling, and energetic, with a quick, restless tongue, and an ambition
to live "like folks." There was a crowd of children.  Two boys had gone
away.  There remained two growing girls; a shy midget of eight; John,
tall, awkward, and eighteen; Jim, younger, quicker, and better looking;
and two babies of indefinite age.  Then there was Josie herself.  She
seemed to be the centre of the family: always busy at service, or at
home, or berry-picking; a little nervous and inclined to scold, like
her mother, yet faithful, too, like her father.  She had about her a
certain fineness, the shadow of an unconscious moral heroism that would
willingly give all of life to make life broader, deeper, and fuller for
her and hers.  I saw much of this family afterwards, and grew to love
them for their honest efforts to be decent and comfortable, and for
their knowledge of their own ignorance.  There was with them no
affectation.  The mother would scold the father for being so "easy";
Josie would roundly berate the boys for carelessness; and all knew that
it was a hard thing to dig a living out of a rocky side-hill.

I secured the school.  I remember the day I rode horseback out to the
commissioner's house with a pleasant young white fellow who wanted the
white school.  The road ran down the bed of a stream; the sun laughed
and the water jingled, and we rode on.  "Come in," said the
commissioner,--"come in.  Have a seat.  Yes, that certificate will do.
Stay to dinner.  What do you want a month?"  "Oh," thought I, "this is
lucky"; but even then fell the awful shadow of the Veil, for they ate
first, then I--alone.

The schoolhouse was a log hut, where Colonel Wheeler used to shelter
his corn.  It sat in a lot behind a rail fence and thorn bushes, near
the sweetest of springs.  There was an entrance where a door once was,
and within, a massive rickety fireplace; great chinks between the logs
served as windows.  Furniture was scarce.  A pale blackboard crouched
in the corner.  My desk was made of three boards, reinforced at
critical points, and my chair, borrowed from the landlady, had to be
returned every night.  Seats for the children--these puzzled me much.
I was haunted by a New England vision of neat little desks and chairs,
but, alas! the reality was rough plank benches without backs, and at
times without legs.  They had the one virtue of making naps
dangerous,--possibly fatal, for the floor was not to be trusted.

It was a hot morning late in July when the school opened.  I trembled
when I heard the patter of little feet down the dusty road, and saw the
growing row of dark solemn faces and bright eager eyes facing me.
First came Josie and her brothers and sisters.  The longing to know, to
be a student in the great school at Nashville, hovered like a star
above this child-woman amid her work and worry, and she studied
doggedly.  There were the Dowells from their farm over toward
Alexandria,--Fanny, with her smooth black face and wondering eyes;
Martha, brown and dull; the pretty girl-wife of a brother, and the
younger brood.

There were the Burkes,--two brown and yellow lads, and a tiny
haughty-eyed girl.  Fat Reuben's little chubby girl came, with golden
face and old-gold hair, faithful and solemn.  'Thenie was on hand
early,--a jolly, ugly, good-hearted girl, who slyly dipped snuff and
looked after her little bow-legged brother.  When her mother could
spare her, 'Tildy came,--a midnight beauty, with starry eyes and
tapering limbs; and her brother, correspondingly homely.  And then the
big boys,--the hulking Lawrences; the lazy Neills, unfathered sons of
mother and daughter; Hickman, with a stoop in his shoulders; and the
rest.

There they sat, nearly thirty of them, on the rough benches, their
faces shading from a pale cream to a deep brown, the little feet bare
and swinging, the eyes full of expectation, with here and there a
twinkle of mischief, and the hands grasping Webster's blue-black
spelling-book.  I loved my school, and the fine faith the children had
in the wisdom of their teacher was truly marvellous.  We read and
spelled together, wrote a little, picked flowers, sang, and listened to
stories of the world beyond the hill.  At times the school would
dwindle away, and I would start out.  I would visit Mun Eddings, who
lived in two very dirty rooms, and ask why little Lugene, whose flaming
face seemed ever ablaze with the dark-red hair uncombed, was absent all
last week, or why I missed so often the inimitable rags of Mack and Ed.
Then the father, who worked Colonel Wheeler's farm on shares, would
tell me how the crops needed the boys; and the thin, slovenly mother,
whose face was pretty when washed, assured me that Lugene must mind the
baby.  "But we'll start them again next week."  When the Lawrences
stopped, I knew that the doubts of the old folks about book-learning
had conquered again, and so, toiling up the hill, and getting as far
into the cabin as possible, I put Cicero "pro Archia Poeta" into the
simplest English with local applications, and usually convinced
them--for a week or so.

On Friday nights I often went home with some of the
children,--sometimes to Doc Burke's farm.  He was a great, loud, thin
Black, ever working, and trying to buy the seventy-five acres of hill
and dale where he lived; but people said that he would surely fail, and
the "white folks would get it all."  His wife was a magnificent Amazon,
with saffron face and shining hair, uncorseted and barefooted, and the
children were strong and beautiful.  They lived in a
one-and-a-half-room cabin in the hollow of the farm, near the spring.
The front room was full of great fat white beds, scrupulously neat; and
there were bad chromos on the walls, and a tired centre-table.  In the
tiny back kitchen I was often invited to "take out and help" myself to
fried chicken and wheat biscuit, "meat" and corn pone, string-beans and
berries.  At first I used to be a little alarmed at the approach of
bedtime in the one lone bedroom, but embarrassment was very deftly
avoided.  First, all the children nodded and slept, and were stowed
away in one great pile of goose feathers; next, the mother and the
father discreetly slipped away to the kitchen while I went to bed;
then, blowing out the dim light, they retired in the dark.  In the
morning all were up and away before I thought of awaking.  Across the
road, where fat Reuben lived, they all went outdoors while the teacher
retired, because they did not boast the luxury of a kitchen.

I liked to stay with the Dowells, for they had four rooms and plenty of
good country fare.  Uncle Bird had a small, rough farm, all woods and
hills, miles from the big road; but he was full of tales,--he preached
now and then,--and with his children, berries, horses, and wheat he was
happy and prosperous.  Often, to keep the peace, I must go where life
was less lovely; for instance, 'Tildy's mother was incorrigibly dirty,
Reuben's larder was limited seriously, and herds of untamed insects
wandered over the Eddingses' beds.  Best of all I loved to go to
Josie's, and sit on the porch, eating peaches, while the mother bustled
and talked: how Josie had bought the sewing-machine; how Josie worked
at service in winter, but that four dollars a month was "mighty little"
wages; how Josie longed to go away to school, but that it "looked like"
they never could get far enough ahead to let her; how the crops failed
and the well was yet unfinished; and, finally, how "mean" some of the
white folks were.

For two summers I lived in this little world; it was dull and humdrum.
The girls looked at the hill in wistful longing, and the boys fretted
and haunted Alexandria.  Alexandria was "town,"--a straggling, lazy
village of houses, churches, and shops, and an aristocracy of Toms,
Dicks, and Captains.  Cuddled on the hill to the north was the village
of the colored folks, who lived in three- or four-room unpainted
cottages, some neat and homelike, and some dirty.  The dwellings were
scattered rather aimlessly, but they centred about the twin temples of
the hamlet, the Methodist, and the Hard-Shell Baptist churches.  These,
in turn, leaned gingerly on a sad-colored schoolhouse.  Hither my
little world wended its crooked way on Sunday to meet other worlds, and
gossip, and wonder, and make the weekly sacrifice with frenzied priest
at the altar of the "old-time religion."  Then the soft melody and
mighty cadences of Negro song fluttered and thundered.

I have called my tiny community a world, and so its isolation made it;
and yet there was among us but a half-awakened common consciousness,
sprung from common joy and grief, at burial, birth, or wedding; from a
common hardship in poverty, poor land, and low wages; and, above all,
from the sight of the Veil that hung between us and Opportunity.  All
this caused us to think some thoughts together; but these, when ripe
for speech, were spoken in various languages.  Those whose eyes
twenty-five and more years before had seen "the glory of the coming of
the Lord," saw in every present hindrance or help a dark fatalism bound
to bring all things right in His own good time.  The mass of those to
whom slavery was a dim recollection of childhood found the world a
puzzling thing: it asked little of them, and they answered with little,
and yet it ridiculed their offering.  Such a paradox they could not
understand, and therefore sank into listless indifference, or
shiftlessness, or reckless bravado.  There were, however, some--such as
Josie, Jim, and Ben--to whom War, Hell, and Slavery were but childhood
tales, whose young appetites had been whetted to an edge by school and
story and half-awakened thought.  Ill could they be content, born
without and beyond the World.  And their weak wings beat against their
barriers,--barriers of caste, of youth, of life; at last, in dangerous
moments, against everything that opposed even a whim.


The ten years that follow youth, the years when first the realization
comes that life is leading somewhere,--these were the years that passed
after I left my little school.  When they were past, I came by chance
once more to the walls of Fisk University, to the halls of the chapel
of melody.  As I lingered there in the joy and pain of meeting old
school-friends, there swept over me a sudden longing to pass again
beyond the blue hill, and to see the homes and the school of other
days, and to learn how life had gone with my school-children; and I
went.

Josie was dead, and the gray-haired mother said simply, "We've had a
heap of trouble since you've been away."  I had feared for Jim.  With a
cultured parentage and a social caste to uphold him, he might have made
a venturesome merchant or a West Point cadet.  But here he was, angry
with life and reckless; and when Fanner Durham charged him with
stealing wheat, the old man had to ride fast to escape the stones which
the furious fool hurled after him.  They told Jim to run away; but he
would not run, and the constable came that afternoon.  It grieved
Josie, and great awkward John walked nine miles every day to see his
little brother through the bars of Lebanon jail.  At last the two came
back together in the dark night.  The mother cooked supper, and Josie
emptied her purse, and the boys stole away.  Josie grew thin and
silent, yet worked the more.  The hill became steep for the quiet old
father, and with the boys away there was little to do in the valley.
Josie helped them to sell the old farm, and they moved nearer town.
Brother Dennis, the carpenter, built a new house with six rooms; Josie
toiled a year in Nashville, and brought back ninety dollars to furnish
the house and change it to a home.

When the spring came, and the birds twittered, and the stream ran proud
and full, little sister Lizzie, bold and thoughtless, flushed with the
passion of youth, bestowed herself on the tempter, and brought home a
nameless child.  Josie shivered and worked on, with the vision of
schooldays all fled, with a face wan and tired,--worked until, on a
summer's day, some one married another; then Josie crept to her mother
like a hurt child, and slept--and sleeps.

I paused to scent the breeze as I entered the valley.  The Lawrences
have gone,--father and son forever,--and the other son lazily digs in
the earth to live.  A new young widow rents out their cabin to fat
Reuben.  Reuben is a Baptist preacher now, but I fear as lazy as ever,
though his cabin has three rooms; and little Ella has grown into a
bouncing woman, and is ploughing corn on the hot hillside.  There are
babies a-plenty, and one half-witted girl.  Across the valley is a
house I did not know before, and there I found, rocking one baby and
expecting another, one of my schoolgirls, a daughter of Uncle Bird
Dowell.  She looked somewhat worried with her new duties, but soon
bristled into pride over her neat cabin and the tale of her thrifty
husband, and the horse and cow, and the farm they were planning to buy.

My log schoolhouse was gone.  In its place stood Progress; and
Progress, I understand, is necessarily ugly.  The crazy foundation
stones still marked the former site of my poor little cabin, and not
far away, on six weary boulders, perched a jaunty board house, perhaps
twenty by thirty feet, with three windows and a door that locked.  Some
of the window-glass was broken, and part of an old iron stove lay
mournfully under the house.  I peeped through the window half
reverently, and found things that were more familiar.  The blackboard
had grown by about two feet, and the seats were still without backs.
The county owns the lot now, I hear, and every year there is a session
of school.  As I sat by the spring and looked on the Old and the New I
felt glad, very glad, and yet--

After two long drinks I started on.  There was the great double
log-house on the corner.  I remembered the broken, blighted family that
used to live there.  The strong, hard face of the mother, with its
wilderness of hair, rose before me.  She had driven her husband away,
and while I taught school a strange man lived there, big and jovial,
and people talked.  I felt sure that Ben and 'Tildy would come to
naught from such a home.  But this is an odd world; for Ben is a busy
farmer in Smith County, "doing well, too," they say, and he had cared
for little 'Tildy until last spring, when a lover married her.  A hard
life the lad had led, toiling for meat, and laughed at because he was
homely and crooked.  There was Sam Carlon, an impudent old skinflint,
who had definite notions about "niggers," and hired Ben a summer and
would not pay him.  Then the hungry boy gathered his sacks together,
and in broad daylight went into Carlon's corn; and when the hard-fisted
farmer set upon him, the angry boy flew at him like a beast.  Doc Burke
saved a murder and a lynching that day.

The story reminded me again of the Burkes, and an impatience seized me
to know who won in the battle, Doc or the seventy-five acres.  For it
is a hard thing to make a farm out of nothing, even in fifteen years.
So I hurried on, thinking of the Burkes.  They used to have a certain
magnificent barbarism about them that I liked.  They were never vulgar,
never immoral, but rather rough and primitive, with an
unconventionality that spent itself in loud guffaws, slaps on the back,
and naps in the corner.  I hurried by the cottage of the misborn Neill
boys.  It was empty, and they were grown into fat, lazy farm-hands.  I
saw the home of the Hickmans, but Albert, with his stooping shoulders,
had passed from the world.  Then I came to the Burkes' gate and peered
through; the enclosure looked rough and untrimmed, and yet there were
the same fences around the old farm save to the left, where lay
twenty-five other acres.  And lo! the cabin in the hollow had climbed
the hill and swollen to a half-finished six-room cottage.

The Burkes held a hundred acres, but they were still in debt.  Indeed,
the gaunt father who toiled night and day would scarcely be happy out
of debt, being so used to it.  Some day he must stop, for his massive
frame is showing decline.  The mother wore shoes, but the lion-like
physique of other days was broken.  The children had grown up.  Rob,
the image of his father, was loud and rough with laughter.  Birdie, my
school baby of six, had grown to a picture of maiden beauty, tall and
tawny.  "Edgar is gone," said the mother, with head half bowed,--"gone
to work in Nashville; he and his father couldn't agree."

Little Doc, the boy born since the time of my school, took me horseback
down the creek next morning toward Farmer Dowell's.  The road and the
stream were battling for mastery, and the stream had the better of it.
We splashed and waded, and the merry boy, perched behind me, chattered
and laughed.  He showed me where Simon Thompson had bought a bit of
ground and a home; but his daughter Lana, a plump, brown, slow girl,
was not there.  She had married a man and a farm twenty miles away.  We
wound on down the stream till we came to a gate that I did not
recognize, but the boy insisted that it was "Uncle Bird's."  The farm
was fat with the growing crop.  In that little valley was a strange
stillness as I rode up; for death and marriage had stolen youth and
left age and childhood there.  We sat and talked that night after the
chores were done.  Uncle Bird was grayer, and his eyes did not see so
well, but he was still jovial.  We talked of the acres bought,--one
hundred and twenty-five,--of the new guest-chamber added, of Martha's
marrying.  Then we talked of death: Fanny and Fred were gone; a shadow
hung over the other daughter, and when it lifted she was to go to
Nashville to school.  At last we spoke of the neighbors, and as night
fell, Uncle Bird told me how, on a night like that, 'Thenie came
wandering back to her home over yonder, to escape the blows of her
husband.  And next morning she died in the home that her little
bow-legged brother, working and saving, had bought for their widowed
mother.

My journey was done, and behind me lay hill and dale, and Life and
Death.  How shall man measure Progress there where the dark-faced Josie
lies?  How many heartfuls of sorrow shall balance a bushel of wheat?
How hard a thing is life to the lowly, and yet how human and real!  And
all this life and love and strife and failure,--is it the twilight of
nightfall or the flush of some faint-dawning day?

Thus sadly musing, I rode to Nashville in the Jim Crow car.




V

Of the Wings of Atalanta

  O black boy of Atlanta!
    But half was spoken;
  The slave's chains and the master's
    Alike are broken;
  The one curse of the races
    Held both in tether;
  They are rising--all are rising--
    The black and white together.

  WHITTIER.


South of the North, yet north of the South, lies the City of a Hundred
Hills, peering out from the shadows of the past into the promise of the
future.  I have seen her in the morning, when the first flush of day
had half-roused her; she lay gray and still on the crimson soil of
Georgia; then the blue smoke began to curl from her chimneys, the
tinkle of bell and scream of whistle broke the silence, the rattle and
roar of busy life slowly gathered and swelled, until the seething whirl
of the city seemed a strange thing in a sleepy land.

Once, they say, even Atlanta slept dull and drowsy at the foot-hills of
the Alleghanies, until the iron baptism of war awakened her with its
sullen waters, aroused and maddened her, and left her listening to the
sea.  And the sea cried to the hills and the hills answered the sea,
till the city rose like a widow and cast away her weeds, and toiled for
her daily bread; toiled steadily, toiled cunningly,--perhaps with some
bitterness, with a touch, of reclame,--and yet with real earnestness,
and real sweat.

It is a hard thing to live haunted by the ghost of an untrue dream; to
see the wide vision of empire fade into real ashes and dirt; to feel
the pang of the conquered, and yet know that with all the Bad that fell
on one black day, something was vanquished that deserved to live,
something killed that in justice had not dared to die; to know that
with the Right that triumphed, triumphed something of Wrong, something
sordid and mean, something less than the broadest and best.  All this
is bitter hard; and many a man and city and people have found in it
excuse for sulking, and brooding, and listless waiting.

Such are not men of the sturdier make; they of Atlanta turned
resolutely toward the future; and that future held aloft vistas of
purple and gold:--Atlanta, Queen of the cotton kingdom; Atlanta,
Gateway to the Land of the Sun; Atlanta, the new Lachesis, spinner of
web and woof for the world.  So the city crowned her hundred hills with
factories, and stored her shops with cunning handiwork, and stretched
long iron ways to greet the busy Mercury in his coming.  And the Nation
talked of her striving.


Perhaps Atlanta was not christened for the winged maiden of dull
Boeotia; you know the tale,--how swarthy Atalanta, tall and wild, would
marry only him who out-raced her; and how the wily Hippomenes laid
three apples of gold in the way.  She fled like a shadow, paused,
startled over the first apple, but even as he stretched his hand, fled
again; hovered over the second, then, slipping from his hot grasp, flew
over river, vale, and hill; but as she lingered over the third, his
arms fell round her, and looking on each other, the blazing passion of
their love profaned the sanctuary of Love, and they were cursed.  If
Atlanta be not named for Atalanta, she ought to have been.

Atalanta is not the first or the last maiden whom greed of gold has led
to defile the temple of Love; and not maids alone, but men in the race
of life, sink from the high and generous ideals of youth to the
gambler's code of the Bourse; and in all our Nation's striving is not
the Gospel of Work befouled by the Gospel of Pay?  So common is this
that one-half think it normal; so unquestioned, that we almost fear to
question if the end of racing is not gold, if the aim of man is not
rightly to be rich.  And if this is the fault of America, how dire a
danger lies before a new land and a new city, lest Atlanta, stooping
for mere gold, shall find that gold accursed!

It was no maiden's idle whim that started this hard racing; a fearful
wilderness lay about the feet of that city after the War,--feudalism,
poverty, the rise of the Third Estate, serfdom, the re-birth of Law and
Order, and above and between all, the Veil of Race.  How heavy a
journey for weary feet!  what wings must Atalanta have to flit over all
this hollow and hill, through sour wood and sullen water, and by the
red waste of sun-baked clay!  How fleet must Atalanta be if she will
not be tempted by gold to profane the Sanctuary!

The Sanctuary of our fathers has, to be sure, few Gods,--some sneer,
"all too few."  There is the thrifty Mercury of New England, Pluto of
the North, and Ceres of the West; and there, too, is the half-forgotten
Apollo of the South, under whose aegis the maiden ran,--and as she ran
she forgot him, even as there in Boeotia Venus was forgot.  She forgot
the old ideal of the Southern gentleman,--that new-world heir of the
grace and courtliness of patrician, knight, and noble; forgot his honor
with his foibles, his kindliness with his carelessness, and stooped to
apples of gold,--to men busier and sharper, thriftier and more
unscrupulous.  Golden apples are beautiful--I remember the lawless days
of boyhood, when orchards in crimson and gold tempted me over fence and
field--and, too, the merchant who has dethroned the planter is no
despicable parvenu.  Work and wealth are the mighty levers to lift this
old new land; thrift and toil and saving are the highways to new hopes
and new possibilities; and yet the warning is needed lest the wily
Hippomenes tempt Atalanta to thinking that golden apples are the goal
of racing, and not mere incidents by the way.

Atlanta must not lead the South to dream of material prosperity as the
touchstone of all success; already the fatal might of this idea is
beginning to spread; it is replacing the finer type of Southerner with
vulgar money-getters; it is burying the sweeter beauties of Southern
life beneath pretence and ostentation.  For every social ill the
panacea of Wealth has been urged,--wealth to overthrow the remains of
the slave feudalism; wealth to raise the "cracker" Third Estate; wealth
to employ the black serfs, and the prospect of wealth to keep them
working; wealth as the end and aim of politics, and as the legal tender
for law and order; and, finally, instead of Truth, Beauty, and
Goodness, wealth as the ideal of the Public School.

Not only is this true in the world which Atlanta typifies, but it is
threatening to be true of a world beneath and beyond that world,--the
Black World beyond the Veil.  Today it makes little difference to
Atlanta, to the South, what the Negro thinks or dreams or wills.  In
the soul-life of the land he is to-day, and naturally will long remain,
unthought of, half forgotten; and yet when he does come to think and
will and do for himself,--and let no man dream that day will never
come,--then the part he plays will not be one of sudden learning, but
words and thoughts he has been taught to lisp in his race-childhood.
To-day the ferment of his striving toward self-realization is to the
strife of the white world like a wheel within a wheel: beyond the Veil
are smaller but like problems of ideals, of leaders and the led, of
serfdom, of poverty, of order and subordination, and, through all, the
Veil of Race.  Few know of these problems, few who know notice them;
and yet there they are, awaiting student, artist, and seer,--a field
for somebody sometime to discover.  Hither has the temptation of
Hippomenes penetrated; already in this smaller world, which now
indirectly and anon directly must influence the larger for good or ill,
the habit is forming of interpreting the world in dollars.  The old
leaders of Negro opinion, in the little groups where there is a Negro
social consciousness, are being replaced by new; neither the black
preacher nor the black teacher leads as he did two decades ago.  Into
their places are pushing the farmers and gardeners, the well-paid
porters and artisans, the business-men,--all those with property and
money.  And with all this change, so curiously parallel to that of the
Other-world, goes too the same inevitable change in ideals.  The South
laments to-day the slow, steady disappearance of a certain type of
Negro,--the faithful, courteous slave of other days, with his
incorruptible honesty and dignified humility.  He is passing away just
as surely as the old type of Southern gentleman is passing, and from
not dissimilar causes,--the sudden transformation of a fair far-off
ideal of Freedom into the hard reality of bread-winning and the
consequent deification of Bread.

In the Black World, the Preacher and Teacher embodied once the ideals
of this people--the strife for another and a juster world, the vague
dream of righteousness, the mystery of knowing; but to-day the danger
is that these ideals, with their simple beauty and weird inspiration,
will suddenly sink to a question of cash and a lust for gold.  Here
stands this black young Atalanta, girding herself for the race that
must be run; and if her eyes be still toward the hills and sky as in
the days of old, then we may look for noble running; but what if some
ruthless or wily or even thoughtless Hippomenes lay golden apples
before her?  What if the Negro people be wooed from a strife for
righteousness, from a love of knowing, to regard dollars as the be-all
and end-all of life?  What if to the Mammonism of America be added the
rising Mammonism of the re-born South, and the Mammonism of this South
be reinforced by the budding Mammonism of its half-wakened black
millions?  Whither, then, is the new-world quest of Goodness and Beauty
and Truth gone glimmering?  Must this, and that fair flower of Freedom
which, despite the jeers of latter-day striplings, sprung from our
fathers' blood, must that too degenerate into a dusty quest of
gold,--into lawless lust with Hippomenes?


The hundred hills of Atlanta are not all crowned with factories.  On
one, toward the west, the setting sun throws three buildings in bold
relief against the sky.  The beauty of the group lies in its simple
unity:--a broad lawn of green rising from the red street and mingled
roses and peaches; north and south, two plain and stately halls; and in
the midst, half hidden in ivy, a larger building, boldly graceful,
sparingly decorated, and with one low spire.  It is a restful group,
--one never looks for more; it is all here, all intelligible.  There I
live, and there I hear from day to day the low hum of restful life.  In
winter's twilight, when the red sun glows, I can see the dark figures
pass between the halls to the music of the night-bell.  In the morning,
when the sun is golden, the clang of the day-bell brings the hurry and
laughter of three hundred young hearts from hall and street, and from
the busy city below,--children all dark and heavy-haired,--to join
their clear young voices in the music of the morning sacrifice.  In a
half-dozen class-rooms they gather then,--here to follow the love-song
of Dido, here to listen to the tale of Troy divine; there to wander
among the stars, there to wander among men and nations,--and elsewhere
other well-worn ways of knowing this queer world.  Nothing new, no
time-saving devices,--simply old time-glorified methods of delving for
Truth, and searching out the hidden beauties of life, and learning the
good of living.  The riddle of existence is the college curriculum that
was laid before the Pharaohs, that was taught in the groves by Plato,
that formed the trivium and quadrivium, and is to-day laid before the
freedmen's sons by Atlanta University.  And this course of study will
not change; its methods will grow more deft and effectual, its content
richer by toil of scholar and sight of seer; but the true college will
ever have one goal,--not to earn meat, but to know the end and aim of
that life which meat nourishes.

The vision of life that rises before these dark eyes has in it nothing
mean or selfish.  Not at Oxford or at Leipsic, not at Yale or Columbia,
is there an air of higher resolve or more unfettered striving; the
determination to realize for men, both black and white, the broadest
possibilities of life, to seek the better and the best, to spread with
their own hands the Gospel of Sacrifice,--all this is the burden of
their talk and dream.  Here, amid a wide desert of caste and
proscription, amid the heart-hurting slights and jars and vagaries of a
deep race-dislike, lies this green oasis, where hot anger cools, and
the bitterness of disappointment is sweetened by the springs and
breezes of Parnassus; and here men may lie and listen, and learn of a
future fuller than the past, and hear the voice of Time:

  "Entbehren sollst du, sollst entbehren."


They made their mistakes, those who planted Fisk and Howard and Atlanta
before the smoke of battle had lifted; they made their mistakes, but
those mistakes were not the things at which we lately laughed somewhat
uproariously.  They were right when they sought to found a new
educational system upon the University: where, forsooth, shall we
ground knowledge save on the broadest and deepest knowledge?  The roots
of the tree, rather than the leaves, are the sources of its life; and
from the dawn of history, from Academus to Cambridge, the culture of
the University has been the broad foundation-stone on which is built
the kindergarten's A B C.

But these builders did make a mistake in minimizing the gravity of the
problem before them; in thinking it a matter of years and decades; in
therefore building quickly and laying their foundation carelessly, and
lowering the standard of knowing, until they had scattered haphazard
through the South some dozen poorly equipped high schools and miscalled
them universities.  They forgot, too, just as their successors are
forgetting, the rule of inequality:--that of the million black youth,
some were fitted to know and some to dig; that some had the talent and
capacity of university men, and some the talent and capacity of
blacksmiths; and that true training meant neither that all should be
college men nor all artisans, but that the one should be made a
missionary of culture to an untaught people, and the other a free
workman among serfs.  And to seek to make the blacksmith a scholar is
almost as silly as the more modern scheme of making the scholar a
blacksmith; almost, but not quite.


The function of the university is not simply to teach bread-winning, or
to furnish teachers for the public schools or to be a centre of polite
society; it is, above all, to be the organ of that fine adjustment
between real life and the growing knowledge of life, an adjustment
which forms the secret of civilization.  Such an institution the South
of to-day sorely needs.  She has religion, earnest, bigoted:--religion
that on both sides the Veil often omits the sixth, seventh, and eighth
commandments, but substitutes a dozen supplementary ones.  She has, as
Atlanta shows, growing thrift and love of toil; but she lacks that
broad knowledge of what the world knows and knew of human living and
doing, which she may apply to the thousand problems of real life to-day
confronting her.  The need of the South is knowledge and culture,--not
in dainty limited quantity, as before the war, but in broad busy
abundance in the world of work; and until she has this, not all the
Apples of Hesperides, be they golden and bejewelled, can save her from
the curse of the Boeotian lovers.

The Wings of Atalanta are the coming universities of the South.  They
alone can bear the maiden past the temptation of golden fruit.  They
will not guide her flying feet away from the cotton and gold; for--ah,
thoughtful Hippomenes!--do not the apples lie in the very Way of Life?
But they will guide her over and beyond them, and leave her kneeling in
the Sanctuary of Truth and Freedom and broad Humanity, virgin and
undefiled.  Sadly did the Old South err in human education, despising
the education of the masses, and niggardly in the support of colleges.
Her ancient university foundations dwindled and withered under the foul
breath of slavery; and even since the war they have fought a failing
fight for life in the tainted air of social unrest and commercial
selfishness, stunted by the death of criticism, and starving for lack
of broadly cultured men.  And if this is the white South's need and
danger, how much heavier the danger and need of the freedmen's sons!
how pressing here the need of broad ideals and true culture, the
conservation of soul from sordid aims and petty passions!  Let us build
the Southern university--William and Mary, Trinity, Georgia, Texas,
Tulane, Vanderbilt, and the others--fit to live; let us build, too, the
Negro universities:--Fisk, whose foundation was ever broad; Howard, at
the heart of the Nation; Atlanta at Atlanta, whose ideal of scholarship
has been held above the temptation of numbers.  Why not here, and
perhaps elsewhere, plant deeply and for all time centres of learning
and living, colleges that yearly would send into the life of the South
a few white men and a few black men of broad culture, catholic
tolerance, and trained ability, joining their hands to other hands, and
giving to this squabble of the Races a decent and dignified peace?

Patience, Humility, Manners, and Taste, common schools and
kindergartens, industrial and technical schools, literature and
tolerance,--all these spring from knowledge and culture, the children
of the university.  So must men and nations build, not otherwise, not
upside down.

Teach workers to work,--a wise saying; wise when applied to German boys
and American girls; wiser when said of Negro boys, for they have less
knowledge of working and none to teach them.  Teach thinkers to
think,--a needed knowledge in a day of loose and careless logic; and
they whose lot is gravest must have the carefulest training to think
aright.  If these things are so, how foolish to ask what is the best
education for one or seven or sixty million souls! shall we teach them
trades, or train them in liberal arts?  Neither and both: teach the
workers to work and the thinkers to think; make carpenters of
carpenters, and philosophers of philosophers, and fops of fools.  Nor
can we pause here.  We are training not isolated men but a living group
of men,--nay, a group within a group.  And the final product of our
training must be neither a psychologist nor a brickmason, but a man.
And to make men, we must have ideals, broad, pure, and inspiring ends
of living,--not sordid money-getting, not apples of gold.  The worker
must work for the glory of his handiwork, not simply for pay; the
thinker must think for truth, not for fame.  And all this is gained
only by human strife and longing; by ceaseless training and education;
by founding Right on righteousness and Truth on the unhampered search
for Truth; by founding the common school on the university, and the
industrial school on the common school; and weaving thus a system, not
a distortion, and bringing a birth, not an abortion.


When night falls on the City of a Hundred Hills, a wind gathers itself
from the seas and comes murmuring westward.  And at its bidding, the
smoke of the drowsy factories sweeps down upon the mighty city and
covers it like a pall, while yonder at the University the stars twinkle
above Stone Hall.  And they say that yon gray mist is the tunic of
Atalanta pausing over her golden apples.  Fly, my maiden, fly, for
yonder comes Hippomenes!




VI

Of the Training of Black Men

  Why, if the Soul can fling the Dust aside,
  And naked on the Air of Heaven ride,
    Were't not a Shame--were't not a Shame for him
  In this clay carcase crippled to abide?

  OMAR KHAYYAM (FITZGERALD).


From the shimmering swirl of waters where many, many thoughts ago the
slave-ship first saw the square tower of Jamestown, have flowed down to
our day three streams of thinking: one swollen from the larger world
here and overseas, saying, the multiplying of human wants in
culture-lands calls for the world-wide cooperation of men in satisfying
them.  Hence arises a new human unity, pulling the ends of earth
nearer, and all men, black, yellow, and white.  The larger humanity
strives to feel in this contact of living Nations and sleeping hordes a
thrill of new life in the world, crying, "If the contact of Life and
Sleep be Death, shame on such Life."  To be sure, behind this thought
lurks the afterthought of force and dominion,--the making of brown men
to delve when the temptation of beads and red calico cloys.

The second thought streaming from the death-ship and the curving river
is the thought of the older South,--the sincere and passionate belief
that somewhere between men and cattle, God created a tertium quid, and
called it a Negro,--a clownish, simple creature, at times even lovable
within its limitations, but straitly foreordained to walk within the
Veil.  To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,--some of
them with favoring chance might become men, but in sheer self-defence
we dare not let them, and we build about them walls so high, and hang
between them and the light a veil so thick, that they shall not even
think of breaking through.

And last of all there trickles down that third and darker thought,--the
thought of the things themselves, the confused, half-conscious mutter
of men who are black and whitened, crying "Liberty, Freedom,
Opportunity--vouchsafe to us, O boastful World, the chance of living
men!"  To be sure, behind the thought lurks the afterthought,--suppose,
after all, the World is right and we are less than men?  Suppose this
mad impulse within is all wrong, some mock mirage from the untrue?

So here we stand among thoughts of human unity, even through conquest
and slavery; the inferiority of black men, even if forced by fraud; a
shriek in the night for the freedom of men who themselves are not yet
sure of their right to demand it.  This is the tangle of thought and
afterthought wherein we are called to solve the problem of training men
for life.

Behind all its curiousness, so attractive alike to sage and dilettante,
lie its dim dangers, throwing across us shadows at once grotesque and
awful.  Plain it is to us that what the world seeks through desert and
wild we have within our threshold,--a stalwart laboring force, suited
to the semi-tropics; if, deaf to the voice of the Zeitgeist, we refuse
to use and develop these men, we risk poverty and loss.  If, on the
other hand, seized by the brutal afterthought, we debauch the race thus
caught in our talons, selfishly sucking their blood and brains in the
future as in the past, what shall save us from national decadence?
Only that saner selfishness, which Education teaches, can find the
rights of all in the whirl of work.

Again, we may decry the color-prejudice of the South, yet it remains a
heavy fact.  Such curious kinks of the human mind exist and must be
reckoned with soberly.  They cannot be laughed away, nor always
successfully stormed at, nor easily abolished by act of legislature.
And yet they must not be encouraged by being let alone.  They must be
recognized as facts, but unpleasant facts; things that stand in the way
of civilization and religion and common decency.  They can be met in
but one way,--by the breadth and broadening of human reason, by
catholicity of taste and culture.  And so, too, the native ambition and
aspiration of men, even though they be black, backward, and ungraceful,
must not lightly be dealt with.  To stimulate wildly weak and untrained
minds is to play with mighty fires; to flout their striving idly is to
welcome a harvest of brutish crime and shameless lethargy in our very
laps.  The guiding of thought and the deft coordination of deed is at
once the path of honor and humanity.

And so, in this great question of reconciling three vast and partially
contradictory streams of thought, the one panacea of Education leaps to
the lips of all:--such human training as will best use the labor of all
men without enslaving or brutalizing; such training as will give us
poise to encourage the prejudices that bulwark society, and to stamp
out those that in sheer barbarity deafen us to the wail of prisoned
souls within the Veil, and the mounting fury of shackled men.

But when we have vaguely said that Education will set this tangle
straight, what have we uttered but a truism?  Training for life teaches
living; but what training for the profitable living together of black
men and white?  A hundred and fifty years ago our task would have
seemed easier.  Then Dr. Johnson blandly assured us that education was
needful solely for the embellishments of life, and was useless for
ordinary vermin.  To-day we have climbed to heights where we would open
at least the outer courts of knowledge to all, display its treasures to
many, and select the few to whom its mystery of Truth is revealed, not
wholly by birth or the accidents of the stock market, but at least in
part according to deftness and aim, talent and character.  This
programme, however, we are sorely puzzled in carrying out through that
part of the land where the blight of slavery fell hardest, and where we
are dealing with two backward peoples.  To make here in human education
that ever necessary combination of the permanent and the contingent--of
the ideal and the practical in workable equilibrium--has been there, as
it ever must be in every age and place, a matter of infinite experiment
and frequent mistakes.

In rough approximation we may point out four varying decades of work in
Southern education since the Civil War.  From the close of the war
until 1876, was the period of uncertain groping and temporary relief.
There were army schools, mission schools, and schools of the Freedmen's
Bureau in chaotic disarrangement seeking system and co-operation.  Then
followed ten years of constructive definite effort toward the building
of complete school systems in the South.  Normal schools and colleges
were founded for the freedmen, and teachers trained there to man the
public schools.  There was the inevitable tendency of war to
underestimate the prejudices of the master and the ignorance of the
slave, and all seemed clear sailing out of the wreckage of the storm.
Meantime, starting in this decade yet especially developing from 1885
to 1895, began the industrial revolution of the South.  The land saw
glimpses of a new destiny and the stirring of new ideals.  The
educational system striving to complete itself saw new obstacles and a
field of work ever broader and deeper.  The Negro colleges, hurriedly
founded, were inadequately equipped, illogically distributed, and of
varying efficiency and grade; the normal and high schools were doing
little more than common-school work, and the common schools were
training but a third of the children who ought to be in them, and
training these too often poorly.  At the same time the white South, by
reason of its sudden conversion from the slavery ideal, by so much the
more became set and strengthened in its racial prejudice, and
crystallized it into harsh law and harsher custom; while the marvellous
pushing forward of the poor white daily threatened to take even bread
and butter from the mouths of the heavily handicapped sons of the
freedmen.  In the midst, then, of the larger problem of Negro education
sprang up the more practical question of work, the inevitable economic
quandary that faces a people in the transition from slavery to freedom,
and especially those who make that change amid hate and prejudice,
lawlessness and ruthless competition.

The industrial school springing to notice in this decade, but coming to
full recognition in the decade beginning with 1895, was the proffered
answer to this combined educational and economic crisis, and an answer
of singular wisdom and timeliness.  From the very first in nearly all
the schools some attention had been given to training in handiwork, but
now was this training first raised to a dignity that brought it in
direct touch with the South's magnificent industrial development, and
given an emphasis which reminded black folk that before the Temple of
Knowledge swing the Gates of Toil.

Yet after all they are but gates, and when turning our eyes from the
temporary and the contingent in the Negro problem to the broader
question of the permanent uplifting and civilization of black men in
America, we have a right to inquire, as this enthusiasm for material
advancement mounts to its height, if after all the industrial school is
the final and sufficient answer in the training of the Negro race; and
to ask gently, but in all sincerity, the ever-recurring query of the
ages, Is not life more than meat, and the body more than raiment?  And
men ask this to-day all the more eagerly because of sinister signs in
recent educational movements.  The tendency is here, born of slavery
and quickened to renewed life by the crazy imperialism of the day, to
regard human beings as among the material resources of a land to be
trained with an eye single to future dividends.  Race-prejudices, which
keep brown and black men in their "places," we are coming to regard as
useful allies with such a theory, no matter how much they may dull the
ambition and sicken the hearts of struggling human beings.  And above
all, we daily hear that an education that encourages aspiration, that
sets the loftiest of ideals and seeks as an end culture and character
rather than bread-winning, is the privilege of white men and the danger
and delusion of black.

Especially has criticism been directed against the former educational
efforts to aid the Negro.  In the four periods I have mentioned, we
find first, boundless, planless enthusiasm and sacrifice; then the
preparation of teachers for a vast public-school system; then the
launching and expansion of that school system amid increasing
difficulties; and finally the training of workmen for the new and
growing industries.  This development has been sharply ridiculed as a
logical anomaly and flat reversal of nature.  Soothly we have been told
that first industrial and manual training should have taught the Negro
to work, then simple schools should have taught him to read and write,
and finally, after years, high and normal schools could have completed
the system, as intelligence and wealth demanded.

That a system logically so complete was historically impossible, it
needs but a little thought to prove.  Progress in human affairs is more
often a pull than a push, a surging forward of the exceptional man, and
the lifting of his duller brethren slowly and painfully to his
vantage-ground.  Thus it was no accident that gave birth to
universities centuries before the common schools, that made fair
Harvard the first flower of our wilderness.  So in the South: the mass
of the freedmen at the end of the war lacked the intelligence so
necessary to modern workingmen.  They must first have the common school
to teach them to read, write, and cipher; and they must have higher
schools to teach teachers for the common schools.  The white teachers
who flocked South went to establish such a common-school system.  Few
held the idea of founding colleges; most of them at first would have
laughed at the idea.  But they faced, as all men since them have faced,
that central paradox of the South,--the social separation of the races.
At that time it was the sudden volcanic rupture of nearly all relations
between black and white, in work and government and family life.  Since
then a new adjustment of relations in economic and political affairs
has grown up,--an adjustment subtle and difficult to grasp, yet
singularly ingenious, which leaves still that frightful chasm at the
color-line across which men pass at their peril.  Thus, then and now,
there stand in the South two separate worlds; and separate not simply
in the higher realms of social intercourse, but also in church and
school, on railway and street-car, in hotels and theatres, in streets
and city sections, in books and newspapers, in asylums and jails, in
hospitals and graveyards.  There is still enough of contact for large
economic and group cooperation, but the separation is so thorough and
deep that it absolutely precludes for the present between the races
anything like that sympathetic and effective group-training and
leadership of the one by the other, such as the American Negro and all
backward peoples must have for effectual progress.

This the missionaries of '68 soon saw; and if effective industrial and
trade schools were impracticable before the establishment of a
common-school system, just as certainly no adequate common schools
could be founded until there were teachers to teach them.  Southern
whites would not teach them; Northern whites in sufficient numbers
could not be had.  If the Negro was to learn, he must teach himself,
and the most effective help that could be given him was the
establishment of schools to train Negro teachers.  This conclusion was
slowly but surely reached by every student of the situation until
simultaneously, in widely separated regions, without consultation or
systematic plan, there arose a series of institutions designed to
furnish teachers for the untaught.  Above the sneers of critics at the
obvious defects of this procedure must ever stand its one crushing
rejoinder: in a single generation they put thirty thousand black
teachers in the South; they wiped out the illiteracy of the majority of
the black people of the land, and they made Tuskegee possible.

Such higher training-schools tended naturally to deepen broader
development: at first they were common and grammar schools, then some
became high schools.  And finally, by 1900, some thirty-four had one
year or more of studies of college grade.  This development was reached
with different degrees of speed in different institutions: Hampton is
still a high school, while Fisk University started her college in 1871,
and Spelman Seminary about 1896.  In all cases the aim was
identical,--to maintain the standards of the lower training by giving
teachers and leaders the best practicable training; and above all, to
furnish the black world with adequate standards of human culture and
lofty ideals of life.  It was not enough that the teachers of teachers
should be trained in technical normal methods; they must also, so far
as possible, be broad-minded, cultured men and women, to scatter
civilization among a people whose ignorance was not simply of letters,
but of life itself.

It can thus be seen that the work of education in the South began with
higher institutions of training, which threw off as their foliage
common schools, and later industrial schools, and at the same time
strove to shoot their roots ever deeper toward college and university
training.  That this was an inevitable and necessary development,
sooner or later, goes without saying; but there has been, and still is,
a question in many minds if the natural growth was not forced, and if
the higher training was not either overdone or done with cheap and
unsound methods.  Among white Southerners this feeling is widespread
and positive.  A prominent Southern journal voiced this in a recent
editorial.

"The experiment that has been made to give the colored students
classical training has not been satisfactory.  Even though many were
able to pursue the course, most of them did so in a parrot-like way,
learning what was taught, but not seeming to appropriate the truth and
import of their instruction, and graduating without sensible aim or
valuable occupation for their future.  The whole scheme has proved a
waste of time, efforts, and the money of the state."

While most fair-minded men would recognize this as extreme and
overdrawn, still without doubt many are asking, Are there a sufficient
number of Negroes ready for college training to warrant the
undertaking?  Are not too many students prematurely forced into this
work?  Does it not have the effect of dissatisfying the young Negro
with his environment?  And do these graduates succeed in real life?
Such natural questions cannot be evaded, nor on the other hand must a
Nation naturally skeptical as to Negro ability assume an unfavorable
answer without careful inquiry and patient openness to conviction.  We
must not forget that most Americans answer all queries regarding the
Negro a priori, and that the least that human courtesy can do is to
listen to evidence.

The advocates of the higher education of the Negro would be the last to
deny the incompleteness and glaring defects of the present system: too
many institutions have attempted to do college work, the work in some
cases has not been thoroughly done, and quantity rather than quality
has sometimes been sought.  But all this can be said of higher
education throughout the land; it is the almost inevitable incident of
educational growth, and leaves the deeper question of the legitimate
demand for the higher training of Negroes untouched.  And this latter
question can be settled in but one way,--by a first-hand study of the
facts.  If we leave out of view all institutions which have not
actually graduated students from a course higher than that of a New
England high school, even though they be called colleges; if then we
take the thirty-four remaining institutions, we may clear up many
misapprehensions by asking searchingly, What kind of institutions are
they? what do they teach? and what sort of men do they graduate?

And first we may say that this type of college, including Atlanta,
Fisk, and Howard, Wilberforce and Claflin, Shaw, and the rest, is
peculiar, almost unique.  Through the shining trees that whisper before
me as I write, I catch glimpses of a boulder of New England granite,
covering a grave, which graduates of Atlanta University have placed
there,--


   "GRATEFUL MEMORY OF THEIR FORMER TEACHER
   AND FRIEND AND OF THE UNSELFISH LIFE HE LIVED,
   AND THE NOBLE WORK HE WROUGHT; THAT THEY,
   THEIR CHILDREN, AND THEIR CHILDREN'S CHILDREN
              MIGHT BE BLESSED."


This was the gift of New England to the freed Negro: not alms, but a
friend; not cash, but character.  It was not and is not money these
seething millions want, but love and sympathy, the pulse of hearts
beating with red blood;--a gift which to-day only their own kindred and
race can bring to the masses, but which once saintly souls brought to
their favored children in the crusade of the sixties, that finest thing
in American history, and one of the few things untainted by sordid
greed and cheap vainglory.  The teachers in these institutions came not
to keep the Negroes in their place, but to raise them out of the
defilement of the places where slavery had wallowed them.  The colleges
they founded were social settlements; homes where the best of the sons
of the freedmen came in close and sympathetic touch with the best
traditions of New England.  They lived and ate together, studied and
worked, hoped and harkened in the dawning light.  In actual formal
content their curriculum was doubtless old-fashioned, but in
educational power it was supreme, for it was the contact of living
souls.

From such schools about two thousand Negroes have gone forth with the
bachelor's degree.  The number in itself is enough to put at rest the
argument that too large a proportion of Negroes are receiving higher
training.  If the ratio to population of all Negro students throughout
the land, in both college and secondary training, be counted,
Commissioner Harris assures us "it must be increased to five times its
present average" to equal the average of the land.

Fifty years ago the ability of Negro students in any appreciable
numbers to master a modern college course would have been difficult to
prove.  To-day it is proved by the fact that four hundred Negroes, many
of whom have been reported as brilliant students, have received the
bachelor's degree from Harvard, Yale, Oberlin, and seventy other
leading colleges.  Here we have, then, nearly twenty-five hundred Negro
graduates, of whom the crucial query must be made, How far did their
training fit them for life?  It is of course extremely difficult to
collect satisfactory data on such a point,--difficult to reach the men,
to get trustworthy testimony, and to gauge that testimony by any
generally acceptable criterion of success.  In 1900, the Conference at
Atlanta University undertook to study these graduates, and published
the results.  First they sought to know what these graduates were
doing, and succeeded in getting answers from nearly two-thirds of the
living.  The direct testimony was in almost all cases corroborated by
the reports of the colleges where they graduated, so that in the main
the reports were worthy of credence.  Fifty-three per cent of these
graduates were teachers,--presidents of institutions, heads of normal
schools, principals of city school-systems, and the like.  Seventeen
per cent were clergymen; another seventeen per cent were in the
professions, chiefly as physicians.  Over six per cent were merchants,
farmers, and artisans, and four per cent were in the government
civil-service.  Granting even that a considerable proportion of the
third unheard from are unsuccessful, this is a record of usefulness.
Personally I know many hundreds of these graduates, and have
corresponded with more than a thousand; through others I have followed
carefully the life-work of scores; I have taught some of them and some
of the pupils whom they have taught, lived in homes which they have
builded, and looked at life through their eyes.  Comparing them as a
class with my fellow students in New England and in Europe, I cannot
hesitate in saying that nowhere have I met men and women with a broader
spirit of helpfulness, with deeper devotion to their life-work, or with
more consecrated determination to succeed in the face of bitter
difficulties than among Negro college-bred men.  They have, to be sure,
their proportion of ne'er-do-wells, their pedants and lettered fools,
but they have a surprisingly small proportion of them; they have not
that culture of manner which we instinctively associate with university
men, forgetting that in reality it is the heritage from cultured homes,
and that no people a generation removed from slavery can escape a
certain unpleasant rawness and gaucherie, despite the best of training.

With all their larger vision and deeper sensibility, these men have
usually been conservative, careful leaders.  They have seldom been
agitators, have withstood the temptation to head the mob, and have
worked steadily and faithfully in a thousand communities in the South.
As teachers, they have given the South a commendable system of city
schools and large numbers of private normal-schools and academies.
Colored college-bred men have worked side by side with white college
graduates at Hampton; almost from the beginning the backbone of
Tuskegee's teaching force has been formed of graduates from Fisk and
Atlanta.  And to-day the institute is filled with college graduates,
from the energetic wife of the principal down to the teacher of
agriculture, including nearly half of the executive council and a
majority of the heads of departments.  In the professions, college men
are slowly but surely leavening the Negro church, are healing and
preventing the devastations of disease, and beginning to furnish legal
protection for the liberty and property of the toiling masses.  All
this is needful work.  Who would do it if Negroes did not?  How could
Negroes do it if they were not trained carefully for it?  If white
people need colleges to furnish teachers, ministers, lawyers, and
doctors, do black people need nothing of the sort?

If it is true that there are an appreciable number of Negro youth in
the land capable by character and talent to receive that higher
training, the end of which is culture, and if the two and a half
thousand who have had something of this training in the past have in
the main proved themselves useful to their race and generation, the
question then comes, What place in the future development of the South
ought the Negro college and college-bred man to occupy?  That the
present social separation and acute race-sensitiveness must eventually
yield to the influences of culture, as the South grows civilized, is
clear.  But such transformation calls for singular wisdom and patience.
If, while the healing of this vast sore is progressing, the races are
to live for many years side by side, united in economic effort, obeying
a common government, sensitive to mutual thought and feeling, yet
subtly and silently separate in many matters of deeper human
intimacy,--if this unusual and dangerous development is to progress
amid peace and order, mutual respect and growing intelligence, it will
call for social surgery at once the delicatest and nicest in modern
history.  It will demand broad-minded, upright men, both white and
black, and in its final accomplishment American civilization will
triumph.  So far as white men are concerned, this fact is to-day being
recognized in the South, and a happy renaissance of university
education seems imminent.  But the very voices that cry hail to this
good work are, strange to relate, largely silent or antagonistic to the
higher education of the Negro.

Strange to relate! for this is certain, no secure civilization can be
built in the South with the Negro as an ignorant, turbulent
proletariat.  Suppose we seek to remedy this by making them laborers
and nothing more: they are not fools, they have tasted of the Tree of
Life, and they will not cease to think, will not cease attempting to
read the riddle of the world.  By taking away their best equipped
teachers and leaders, by slamming the door of opportunity in the faces
of their bolder and brighter minds, will you make them satisfied with
their lot? or will you not rather transfer their leading from the hands
of men taught to think to the hands of untrained demagogues?  We ought
not to forget that despite the pressure of poverty, and despite the
active discouragement and even ridicule of friends, the demand for
higher training steadily increases among Negro youth: there were, in
the years from 1875 to 1880, 22 Negro graduates from Northern colleges;
from 1885 to 1890 there were 43, and from 1895 to 1900, nearly 100
graduates.  From Southern Negro colleges there were, in the same three
periods, 143, 413, and over 500 graduates.  Here, then, is the plain
thirst for training; by refusing to give this Talented Tenth the key to
knowledge, can any sane man imagine that they will lightly lay aside
their yearning and contentedly become hewers of wood and drawers of
water?

No. The dangerously clear logic of the Negro's position will more and
more loudly assert itself in that day when increasing wealth and more
intricate social organization preclude the South from being, as it so
largely is, simply an armed camp for intimidating black folk.  Such
waste of energy cannot be spared if the South is to catch up with
civilization.  And as the black third of the land grows in thrift and
skill, unless skilfully guided in its larger philosophy, it must more
and more brood over the red past and the creeping, crooked present,
until it grasps a gospel of revolt and revenge and throws its new-found
energies athwart the current of advance.  Even to-day the masses of the
Negroes see all too clearly the anomalies of their position and the
moral crookedness of yours.  You may marshal strong indictments against
them, but their counter-cries, lacking though they be in formal logic,
have burning truths within them which you may not wholly ignore, O
Southern Gentlemen!  If you deplore their presence here, they ask, Who
brought us?  When you cry, Deliver us from the vision of intermarriage,
they answer that legal marriage is infinitely better than systematic
concubinage and prostitution.  And if in just fury you accuse their
vagabonds of violating women, they also in fury quite as just may
reply: The rape which your gentlemen have done against helpless black
women in defiance of your own laws is written on the foreheads of two
millions of mulattoes, and written in ineffaceable blood.  And finally,
when you fasten crime upon this race as its peculiar trait, they answer
that slavery was the arch-crime, and lynching and lawlessness its twin
abortions; that color and race are not crimes, and yet it is they which
in this land receive most unceasing condemnation, North, East, South,
and West.

I will not say such arguments are wholly justified,--I will not insist
that there is no other side to the shield; but I do say that of the
nine millions of Negroes in this nation, there is scarcely one out of
the cradle to whom these arguments do not daily present themselves in
the guise of terrible truth.  I insist that the question of the future
is how best to keep these millions from brooding over the wrongs of the
past and the difficulties of the present, so that all their energies
may be bent toward a cheerful striving and cooperation with their white
neighbors toward a larger, juster, and fuller future.  That one wise
method of doing this lies in the closer knitting of the Negro to the
great industrial possibilities of the South is a great truth.  And this
the common schools and the manual training and trade schools are
working to accomplish.  But these alone are not enough.  The
foundations of knowledge in this race, as in others, must be sunk deep
in the college and university if we would build a solid, permanent
structure.  Internal problems of social advance must inevitably come,
--problems of work and wages, of families and homes, of morals and the
true valuing of the things of life; and all these and other inevitable
problems of civilization the Negro must meet and solve largely for
himself, by reason of his isolation; and can there be any possible
solution other than by study and thought and an appeal to the rich
experience of the past?  Is there not, with such a group and in such a
crisis, infinitely more danger to be apprehended from half-trained
minds and shallow thinking than from over-education and
over-refinement?  Surely we have wit enough to found a Negro college so
manned and equipped as to steer successfully between the dilettante and
the fool.  We shall hardly induce black men to believe that if their
stomachs be full, it matters little about their brains.  They already
dimly perceive that the paths of peace winding between honest toil and
dignified manhood call for the guidance of skilled thinkers, the
loving, reverent comradeship between the black lowly and the black men
emancipated by training and culture.

The function of the Negro college, then, is clear: it must maintain the
standards of popular education, it must seek the social regeneration of
the Negro, and it must help in the solution of problems of race contact
and cooperation.  And finally, beyond all this, it must develop men.
Above our modern socialism, and out of the worship of the mass, must
persist and evolve that higher individualism which the centres of
culture protect; there must come a loftier respect for the sovereign
human soul that seeks to know itself and the world about it; that seeks
a freedom for expansion and self-development; that will love and hate
and labor in its own way, untrammeled alike by old and new.  Such souls
aforetime have inspired and guided worlds, and if we be not wholly
bewitched by our Rhinegold, they shall again.  Herein the longing of
black men must have respect: the rich and bitter depth of their
experience, the unknown treasures of their inner life, the strange
rendings of nature they have seen, may give the world new points of
view and make their loving, living, and doing precious to all human
hearts.  And to themselves in these the days that try their souls, the
chance to soar in the dim blue air above the smoke is to their finer
spirits boon and guerdon for what they lose on earth by being black.

I sit with Shakespeare and he winces not.  Across the color line I move
arm in arm with Balzac and Dumas, where smiling men and welcoming women
glide in gilded halls.  From out the caves of evening that swing
between the strong-limbed earth and the tracery of the stars, I summon
Aristotle and Aurelius and what soul I will, and they come all
graciously with no scorn nor condescension.  So, wed with Truth, I
dwell above the Veil.  Is this the life you grudge us, O knightly
America?  Is this the life you long to change into the dull red
hideousness of Georgia?  Are you so afraid lest peering from this high
Pisgah, between Philistine and Amalekite, we sight the Promised Land?




VII

Of the Black Belt

  I am black but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
  As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
  Look not upon me, because I am black,
  Because the sun hath looked upon me:
  My mother's children were angry with me;
  They made me the keeper of the vineyards;
  But mine own vineyard have I not kept.

  THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


Out of the North the train thundered, and we woke to see the crimson
soil of Georgia stretching away bare and monotonous right and left.
Here and there lay straggling, unlovely villages, and lean men loafed
leisurely at the depots; then again came the stretch of pines and clay.
Yet we did not nod, nor weary of the scene; for this is historic
ground.  Right across our track, three hundred and sixty years ago,
wandered the cavalcade of Hernando de Soto, looking for gold and the
Great Sea; and he and his foot-sore captives disappeared yonder in the
grim forests to the west.  Here sits Atlanta, the city of a hundred
hills, with something Western, something Southern, and something quite
its own, in its busy life.  Just this side Atlanta is the land of the
Cherokees and to the southwest, not far from where Sam Hose was
crucified, you may stand on a spot which is to-day the centre of the
Negro problem,--the centre of those nine million men who are America's
dark heritage from slavery and the slave-trade.

Not only is Georgia thus the geographical focus of our Negro
population, but in many other respects, both now and yesterday, the
Negro problems have seemed to be centered in this State.  No other
State in the Union can count a million Negroes among its citizens,--a
population as large as the slave population of the whole Union in 1800;
no other State fought so long and strenuously to gather this host of
Africans.  Oglethorpe thought slavery against law and gospel; but the
circumstances which gave Georgia its first inhabitants were not
calculated to furnish citizens over-nice in their ideas about rum and
slaves.  Despite the prohibitions of the trustees, these Georgians,
like some of their descendants, proceeded to take the law into their
own hands; and so pliant were the judges, and so flagrant the
smuggling, and so earnest were the prayers of Whitefield, that by the
middle of the eighteenth century all restrictions were swept away, and
the slave-trade went merrily on for fifty years and more.

Down in Darien, where the Delegal riots took place some summers ago,
there used to come a strong protest against slavery from the Scotch
Highlanders; and the Moravians of Ebenezer did not like the system.
But not till the Haytian Terror of Toussaint was the trade in men even
checked; while the national statute of 1808 did not suffice to stop it.
How the Africans poured in!--fifty thousand between 1790 and 1810, and
then, from Virginia and from smugglers, two thousand a year for many
years more.  So the thirty thousand Negroes of Georgia in 1790 doubled
in a decade,--were over a hundred thousand in 1810, had reached two
hundred thousand in 1820, and half a million at the time of the war.
Thus like a snake the black population writhed upward.

But we must hasten on our journey.  This that we pass as we near
Atlanta is the ancient land of the Cherokees,--that brave Indian nation
which strove so long for its fatherland, until Fate and the United
States Government drove them beyond the Mississippi.  If you wish to
ride with me you must come into the "Jim Crow Car."  There will be no
objection,--already four other white men, and a little white girl with
her nurse, are in there.  Usually the races are mixed in there; but the
white coach is all white.  Of course this car is not so good as the
other, but it is fairly clean and comfortable.  The discomfort lies
chiefly in the hearts of those four black men yonder--and in mine.

We rumble south in quite a business-like way.  The bare red clay and
pines of Northern Georgia begin to disappear, and in their place
appears a rich rolling land, luxuriant, and here and there well tilled.
This is the land of the Creek Indians; and a hard time the Georgians
had to seize it.  The towns grow more frequent and more interesting,
and brand-new cotton mills rise on every side.  Below Macon the world
grows darker; for now we approach the Black Belt,--that strange land of
shadows, at which even slaves paled in the past, and whence come now
only faint and half-intelligible murmurs to the world beyond.  The "Jim
Crow Car" grows larger and a shade better; three rough field-hands and
two or three white loafers accompany us, and the newsboy still spreads
his wares at one end.  The sun is setting, but we can see the great
cotton country as we enter it,--the soil now dark and fertile, now thin
and gray, with fruit-trees and dilapidated buildings,--all the way to
Albany.

At Albany, in the heart of the Black Belt, we stop.  Two hundred miles
south of Atlanta, two hundred miles west of the Atlantic, and one
hundred miles north of the Great Gulf lies Dougherty County, with ten
thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.  The Flint River winds down
from Andersonville, and, turning suddenly at Albany, the county-seat,
hurries on to join the Chattahoochee and the sea.  Andrew Jackson knew
the Flint well, and marched across it once to avenge the Indian
Massacre at Fort Mims.  That was in 1814, not long before the battle of
New Orleans; and by the Creek treaty that followed this campaign, all
Dougherty County, and much other rich land, was ceded to Georgia.
Still, settlers fought shy of this land, for the Indians were all
about, and they were unpleasant neighbors in those days.  The panic of
1837, which Jackson bequeathed to Van Buren, turned the planters from
the impoverished lands of Virginia, the Carolinas, and east Georgia,
toward the West.  The Indians were removed to Indian Territory, and
settlers poured into these coveted lands to retrieve their broken
fortunes.  For a radius of a hundred miles about Albany, stretched a
great fertile land, luxuriant with forests of pine, oak, ash, hickory,
and poplar; hot with the sun and damp with the rich black swamp-land;
and here the corner-stone of the Cotton Kingdom was laid.

Albany is to-day a wide-streeted, placid, Southern town, with a broad
sweep of stores and saloons, and flanking rows of homes,--whites
usually to the north, and blacks to the south.  Six days in the week
the town looks decidedly too small for itself, and takes frequent and
prolonged naps.  But on Saturday suddenly the whole county disgorges
itself upon the place, and a perfect flood of black peasantry pours
through the streets, fills the stores, blocks the sidewalks, chokes the
thoroughfares, and takes full possession of the town.  They are black,
sturdy, uncouth country folk, good-natured and simple, talkative to a
degree, and yet far more silent and brooding than the crowds of the
Rhine-pfalz, or Naples, or Cracow.  They drink considerable quantities
of whiskey, but do not get very drunk; they talk and laugh loudly at
times, but seldom quarrel or fight.  They walk up and down the streets,
meet and gossip with friends, stare at the shop windows, buy coffee,
cheap candy, and clothes, and at dusk drive home--happy? well no, not
exactly happy, but much happier than as though they had not come.

Thus Albany is a real capital,--a typical Southern county town, the
centre of the life of ten thousand souls; their point of contact with
the outer world, their centre of news and gossip, their market for
buying and selling, borrowing and lending, their fountain of justice
and law.  Once upon a time we knew country life so well and city life
so little, that we illustrated city life as that of a closely crowded
country district.  Now the world has well-nigh forgotten what the
country is, and we must imagine a little city of black people scattered
far and wide over three hundred lonesome square miles of land, without
train or trolley, in the midst of cotton and corn, and wide patches of
sand and gloomy soil.

It gets pretty hot in Southern Georgia in July,--a sort of dull,
determined heat that seems quite independent of the sun; so it took us
some days to muster courage enough to leave the porch and venture out
on the long country roads, that we might see this unknown world.
Finally we started.  It was about ten in the morning, bright with a
faint breeze, and we jogged leisurely southward in the valley of the
Flint.  We passed the scattered box-like cabins of the brickyard hands,
and the long tenement-row facetiously called "The Ark," and were soon
in the open country, and on the confines of the great plantations of
other days.  There is the "Joe Fields place"; a rough old fellow was
he, and had killed many a "nigger" in his day.  Twelve miles his
plantation used to run,--a regular barony.  It is nearly all gone now;
only straggling bits belong to the family, and the rest has passed to
Jews and Negroes.  Even the bits which are left are heavily mortgaged,
and, like the rest of the land, tilled by tenants.  Here is one of them
now,--a tall brown man, a hard worker and a hard drinker, illiterate,
but versed in farmlore, as his nodding crops declare.  This
distressingly new board house is his, and he has just moved out of
yonder moss-grown cabin with its one square room.

From the curtains in Benton's house, down the road, a dark comely face
is staring at the strangers; for passing carriages are not every-day
occurrences here.  Benton is an intelligent yellow man with a
good-sized family, and manages a plantation blasted by the war and now
the broken staff of the widow.  He might be well-to-do, they say; but
he carouses too much in Albany.  And the half-desolate spirit of
neglect born of the very soil seems to have settled on these acres.  In
times past there were cotton-gins and machinery here; but they have
rotted away.

The whole land seems forlorn and forsaken.  Here are the remnants of
the vast plantations of the Sheldons, the Pellots, and the Rensons; but
the souls of them are passed.  The houses lie in half ruin, or have
wholly disappeared; the fences have flown, and the families are
wandering in the world.  Strange vicissitudes have met these whilom
masters.  Yonder stretch the wide acres of Bildad Reasor; he died in
war-time, but the upstart overseer hastened to wed the widow.  Then he
went, and his neighbors too, and now only the black tenant remains; but
the shadow-hand of the master's grand-nephew or cousin or creditor
stretches out of the gray distance to collect the rack-rent
remorselessly, and so the land is uncared-for and poor.  Only black
tenants can stand such a system, and they only because they must.  Ten
miles we have ridden to-day and have seen no white face.

A resistless feeling of depression falls slowly upon us, despite the
gaudy sunshine and the green cottonfields.  This, then, is the Cotton
Kingdom,--the shadow of a marvellous dream.  And where is the King?
Perhaps this is he,--the sweating ploughman, tilling his eighty acres
with two lean mules, and fighting a hard battle with debt.  So we sit
musing, until, as we turn a corner on the sandy road, there comes a
fairer scene suddenly in view,--a neat cottage snugly ensconced by the
road, and near it a little store.  A tall bronzed man rises from the
porch as we hail him, and comes out to our carriage.  He is six feet in
height, with a sober face that smiles gravely.  He walks too straight
to be a tenant,--yes, he owns two hundred and forty acres.  "The land
is run down since the boom-days of eighteen hundred and fifty," he
explains, and cotton is low.  Three black tenants live on his place,
and in his little store he keeps a small stock of tobacco, snuff, soap,
and soda, for the neighborhood.  Here is his gin-house with new
machinery just installed.  Three hundred bales of cotton went through
it last year.  Two children he has sent away to school.  Yes, he says
sadly, he is getting on, but cotton is down to four cents; I know how
Debt sits staring at him.

Wherever the King may be, the parks and palaces of the Cotton Kingdom
have not wholly disappeared.  We plunge even now into great groves of
oak and towering pine, with an undergrowth of myrtle and shrubbery.
This was the "home-house" of the Thompsons,--slave-barons who drove
their coach and four in the merry past.  All is silence now, and ashes,
and tangled weeds.  The owner put his whole fortune into the rising
cotton industry of the fifties, and with the falling prices of the
eighties he packed up and stole away.  Yonder is another grove, with
unkempt lawn, great magnolias, and grass-grown paths.  The Big House
stands in half-ruin, its great front door staring blankly at the
street, and the back part grotesquely restored for its black tenant.  A
shabby, well-built Negro he is, unlucky and irresolute.  He digs hard
to pay rent to the white girl who owns the remnant of the place.  She
married a policeman, and lives in Savannah.

Now and again we come to churches.  Here is one now,--Shepherd's, they
call it,--a great whitewashed barn of a thing, perched on stilts of
stone, and looking for all the world as though it were just resting
here a moment and might be expected to waddle off down the road at
almost any time.  And yet it is the centre of a hundred cabin homes;
and sometimes, of a Sunday, five hundred persons from far and near
gather here and talk and eat and sing.  There is a schoolhouse near,--a
very airy, empty shed; but even this is an improvement, for usually the
school is held in the church.  The churches vary from log-huts to those
like Shepherd's, and the schools from nothing to this little house that
sits demurely on the county line.  It is a tiny plank-house, perhaps
ten by twenty, and has within a double row of rough unplaned benches,
resting mostly on legs, sometimes on boxes.  Opposite the door is a
square home-made desk.  In one corner are the ruins of a stove, and in
the other a dim blackboard.  It is the cheerfulest schoolhouse I have
seen in Dougherty, save in town.  Back of the schoolhouse is a
lodgehouse two stories high and not quite finished.  Societies meet
there,--societies "to care for the sick and bury the dead"; and these
societies grow and flourish.

We had come to the boundaries of Dougherty, and were about to turn west
along the county-line, when all these sights were pointed out to us by
a kindly old man, black, white-haired, and seventy.  Forty-five years
he had lived here, and now supports himself and his old wife by the
help of the steer tethered yonder and the charity of his black
neighbors.  He shows us the farm of the Hills just across the county
line in Baker,--a widow and two strapping sons, who raised ten bales
(one need not add "cotton" down here) last year.  There are fences and
pigs and cows, and the soft-voiced, velvet-skinned young Memnon, who
sauntered half-bashfully over to greet the strangers, is proud of his
home.  We turn now to the west along the county line.  Great dismantled
trunks of pines tower above the green cottonfields, cracking their
naked gnarled fingers toward the border of living forest beyond.  There
is little beauty in this region, only a sort of crude abandon that
suggests power,--a naked grandeur, as it were.  The houses are bare and
straight; there are no hammocks or easy-chairs, and few flowers.  So
when, as here at Rawdon's, one sees a vine clinging to a little porch,
and home-like windows peeping over the fences, one takes a long breath.
I think I never before quite realized the place of the Fence in
civilization.  This is the Land of the Unfenced, where crouch on either
hand scores of ugly one-room cabins, cheerless and dirty.  Here lies
the Negro problem in its naked dirt and penury.  And here are no
fences.  But now and then the crisscross rails or straight palings
break into view, and then we know a touch of culture is near.  Of
course Harrison Gohagen,--a quiet yellow man, young, smooth-faced, and
diligent,--of course he is lord of some hundred acres, and we expect to
see a vision of well-kept rooms and fat beds and laughing children.
For has he not fine fences?  And those over yonder, why should they
build fences on the rack-rented land?  It will only increase their rent.

On we wind, through sand and pines and glimpses of old plantations,
till there creeps into sight a cluster of buildings,--wood and brick,
mills and houses, and scattered cabins.  It seemed quite a village.  As
it came nearer and nearer, however, the aspect changed: the buildings
were rotten, the bricks were falling out, the mills were silent, and
the store was closed.  Only in the cabins appeared now and then a bit
of lazy life.  I could imagine the place under some weird spell, and
was half-minded to search out the princess.  An old ragged black man,
honest, simple, and improvident, told us the tale.  The Wizard of the
North--the Capitalist--had rushed down in the seventies to woo this coy
dark soil.  He bought a square mile or more, and for a time the
field-hands sang, the gins groaned, and the mills buzzed.  Then came a
change.  The agent's son embezzled the funds and ran off with them.
Then the agent himself disappeared.  Finally the new agent stole even
the books, and the company in wrath closed its business and its houses,
refused to sell, and let houses and furniture and machinery rust and
rot.  So the Waters-Loring plantation was stilled by the spell of
dishonesty, and stands like some gaunt rebuke to a scarred land.

Somehow that plantation ended our day's journey; for I could not shake
off the influence of that silent scene.  Back toward town we glided,
past the straight and thread-like pines, past a dark tree-dotted pond
where the air was heavy with a dead sweet perfume.  White
slender-legged curlews flitted by us, and the garnet blooms of the
cotton looked gay against the green and purple stalks.  A peasant girl
was hoeing in the field, white-turbaned and black-limbed.  All this we
saw, but the spell still lay upon us.

How curious a land is this,--how full of untold story, of tragedy and
laughter, and the rich legacy of human life; shadowed with a tragic
past, and big with future promise!  This is the Black Belt of Georgia.
Dougherty County is the west end of the Black Belt, and men once called
it the Egypt of the Confederacy.  It is full of historic interest.
First there is the Swamp, to the west, where the Chickasawhatchee flows
sullenly southward.  The shadow of an old plantation lies at its edge,
forlorn and dark.  Then comes the pool; pendent gray moss and brackish
waters appear, and forests filled with wildfowl.  In one place the wood
is on fire, smouldering in dull red anger; but nobody minds.  Then the
swamp grows beautiful; a raised road, built by chained Negro convicts,
dips down into it, and forms a way walled and almost covered in living
green.  Spreading trees spring from a prodigal luxuriance of
undergrowth; great dark green shadows fade into the black background,
until all is one mass of tangled semi-tropical foliage, marvellous in
its weird savage splendor.  Once we crossed a black silent stream,
where the sad trees and writhing creepers, all glinting fiery yellow
and green, seemed like some vast cathedral,--some green Milan builded
of wildwood.  And as I crossed, I seemed to see again that fierce
tragedy of seventy years ago.  Osceola, the Indian-Negro chieftain, had
risen in the swamps of Florida, vowing vengeance.  His war-cry reached
the red Creeks of Dougherty, and their war-cry rang from the
Chattahoochee to the sea.  Men and women and children fled and fell
before them as they swept into Dougherty.  In yonder shadows a dark and
hideously painted warrior glided stealthily on,--another and another,
until three hundred had crept into the treacherous swamp.  Then the
false slime closing about them called the white men from the east.
Waist-deep, they fought beneath the tall trees, until the war-cry was
hushed and the Indians glided back into the west.  Small wonder the
wood is red.

Then came the black slaves.  Day after day the clank of chained feet
marching from Virginia and Carolina to Georgia was heard in these rich
swamp lands.  Day after day the songs of the callous, the wail of the
motherless, and the muttered curses of the wretched echoed from the
Flint to the Chickasawhatchee, until by 1860 there had risen in West
Dougherty perhaps the richest slave kingdom the modern world ever knew.
A hundred and fifty barons commanded the labor of nearly six thousand
Negroes, held sway over farms with ninety thousand acres tilled land,
valued even in times of cheap soil at three millions of dollars.
Twenty thousand bales of ginned cotton went yearly to England, New and
Old; and men that came there bankrupt made money and grew rich.  In a
single decade the cotton output increased four-fold and the value of
lands was tripled.  It was the heyday of the nouveau riche, and a life
of careless extravagance among the masters.  Four and six bobtailed
thoroughbreds rolled their coaches to town; open hospitality and gay
entertainment were the rule.  Parks and groves were laid out, rich with
flower and vine, and in the midst stood the low wide-halled "big
house," with its porch and columns and great fireplaces.

And yet with all this there was something sordid, something forced,--a
certain feverish unrest and recklessness; for was not all this show and
tinsel built upon a groan?  "This land was a little Hell," said a
ragged, brown, and grave-faced man to me.  We were seated near a
roadside blacksmith shop, and behind was the bare ruin of some master's
home.  "I've seen niggers drop dead in the furrow, but they were kicked
aside, and the plough never stopped.  Down in the guard-house, there's
where the blood ran."

With such foundations a kingdom must in time sway and fall.  The
masters moved to Macon and Augusta, and left only the irresponsible
overseers on the land.  And the result is such ruin as this, the Lloyd
"home-place":--great waving oaks, a spread of lawn, myrtles and
chestnuts, all ragged and wild; a solitary gate-post standing where
once was a castle entrance; an old rusty anvil lying amid rotting
bellows and wood in the ruins of a blacksmith shop; a wide rambling old
mansion, brown and dingy, filled now with the grandchildren of the
slaves who once waited on its tables; while the family of the master
has dwindled to two lone women, who live in Macon and feed hungrily off
the remnants of an earldom.  So we ride on, past phantom gates and
falling homes,--past the once flourishing farms of the Smiths, the
Gandys, and the Lagores,--and find all dilapidated and half ruined,
even there where a solitary white woman, a relic of other days, sits
alone in state among miles of Negroes and rides to town in her ancient
coach each day.

This was indeed the Egypt of the Confederacy,--the rich granary whence
potatoes and corn and cotton poured out to the famished and ragged
Confederate troops as they battled for a cause lost long before 1861.
Sheltered and secure, it became the place of refuge for families,
wealth, and slaves.  Yet even then the hard ruthless rape of the land
began to tell.  The red-clay sub-soil already had begun to peer above
the loam.  The harder the slaves were driven the more careless and
fatal was their farming.  Then came the revolution of war and
Emancipation, the bewilderment of Reconstruction,--and now, what is the
Egypt of the Confederacy, and what meaning has it for the nation's weal
or woe?

It is a land of rapid contrasts and of curiously mingled hope and pain.
Here sits a pretty blue-eyed quadroon hiding her bare feet; she was
married only last week, and yonder in the field is her dark young
husband, hoeing to support her, at thirty cents a day without board.
Across the way is Gatesby, brown and tall, lord of two thousand acres
shrewdly won and held.  There is a store conducted by his black son, a
blacksmith shop, and a ginnery.  Five miles below here is a town owned
and controlled by one white New Englander.  He owns almost a Rhode
Island county, with thousands of acres and hundreds of black laborers.
Their cabins look better than most, and the farm, with machinery and
fertilizers, is much more business-like than any in the county,
although the manager drives hard bargains in wages.  When now we turn
and look five miles above, there on the edge of town are five houses of
prostitutes,--two of blacks and three of whites; and in one of the
houses of the whites a worthless black boy was harbored too openly two
years ago; so he was hanged for rape.  And here, too, is the high
whitewashed fence of the "stockade," as the county prison is called;
the white folks say it is ever full of black criminals,--the black
folks say that only colored boys are sent to jail, and they not because
they are guilty, but because the State needs criminals to eke out its
income by their forced labor.

Immigrants are heirs of the slave baron in Dougherty; and as we ride
westward, by wide stretching cornfields and stubby orchards of peach
and pear, we see on all sides within the circle of dark forest a Land
of Canaan.  Here and there are tales of projects for money-getting,
born in the swift days of Reconstruction,--"improvement" companies,
wine companies, mills and factories; most failed, and foreigners fell
heir.  It is a beautiful land, this Dougherty, west of the Flint.  The
forests are wonderful, the solemn pines have disappeared, and this is
the "Oakey Woods," with its wealth of hickories, beeches, oaks and
palmettos.  But a pall of debt hangs over the beautiful land; the
merchants are in debt to the wholesalers, the planters are in debt to
the merchants, the tenants owe the planters, and laborers bow and bend
beneath the burden of it all.  Here and there a man has raised his head
above these murky waters.  We passed one fenced stock-farm with grass
and grazing cattle, that looked very home-like after endless corn and
cotton.  Here and there are black free-holders: there is the gaunt
dull-black Jackson, with his hundred acres.  "I says, 'Look up!  If you
don't look up you can't get up,'" remarks Jackson, philosophically.
And he's gotten up.  Dark Carter's neat barns would do credit to New
England.  His master helped him to get a start, but when the black man
died last fall the master's sons immediately laid claim to the estate.
"And them white folks will get it, too," said my yellow gossip.

I turn from these well-tended acres with a comfortable feeling that the
Negro is rising.  Even then, however, the fields, as we proceed, begin
to redden and the trees disappear.  Rows of old cabins appear filled
with renters and laborers,--cheerless, bare, and dirty, for the most
part, although here and there the very age and decay makes the scene
picturesque.  A young black fellow greets us.  He is twenty-two, and
just married.  Until last year he had good luck renting; then cotton
fell, and the sheriff seized and sold all he had.  So he moved here,
where the rent is higher, the land poorer, and the owner inflexible; he
rents a forty-dollar mule for twenty dollars a year.  Poor lad!--a
slave at twenty-two.  This plantation, owned now by a foreigner, was a
part of the famous Bolton estate.  After the war it was for many years
worked by gangs of Negro convicts,--and black convicts then were even
more plentiful than now; it was a way of making Negroes work, and the
question of guilt was a minor one.  Hard tales of cruelty and
mistreatment of the chained freemen are told, but the county
authorities were deaf until the free-labor market was nearly ruined by
wholesale migration.  Then they took the convicts from the plantations,
but not until one of the fairest regions of the "Oakey Woods" had been
ruined and ravished into a red waste, out of which only a Yankee or an
immigrant could squeeze more blood from debt-cursed tenants.

No wonder that Luke Black, slow, dull, and discouraged, shuffles to our
carriage and talks hopelessly.  Why should he strive?  Every year finds
him deeper in debt.  How strange that Georgia, the world-heralded
refuge of poor debtors, should bind her own to sloth and misfortune as
ruthlessly as ever England did!  The poor land groans with its
birth-pains, and brings forth scarcely a hundred pounds of cotton to
the acre, where fifty years ago it yielded eight times as much.  Of his
meagre yield the tenant pays from a quarter to a third in rent, and
most of the rest in interest on food and supplies bought on credit.
Twenty years yonder sunken-cheeked, old black man has labored under
that system, and now, turned day-laborer, is supporting his wife and
boarding himself on his wages of a dollar and a half a week, received
only part of the year.

The Bolton convict farm formerly included the neighboring plantation.
Here it was that the convicts were lodged in the great log prison still
standing.  A dismal place it still remains, with rows of ugly huts
filled with surly ignorant tenants.  "What rent do you pay here?" I
inquired.  "I don't know,--what is it, Sam?"  "All we make," answered
Sam.  It is a depressing place,--bare, unshaded, with no charm of past
association, only a memory of forced human toil,--now, then, and before
the war.  They are not happy, these black men whom we meet throughout
this region.  There is little of the joyous abandon and playfulness
which we are wont to associate with the plantation Negro.  At best, the
natural good-nature is edged with complaint or has changed into
sullenness and gloom.  And now and then it blazes forth in veiled but
hot anger.  I remember one big red-eyed black whom we met by the
roadside.  Forty-five years he had labored on this farm, beginning with
nothing, and still having nothing.  To be sure, he had given four
children a common-school training, and perhaps if the new fence-law had
not allowed unfenced crops in West Dougherty he might have raised a
little stock and kept ahead.  As it is, he is hopelessly in debt,
disappointed, and embittered.  He stopped us to inquire after the black
boy in Albany, whom it was said a policeman had shot and killed for
loud talking on the sidewalk.  And then he said slowly: "Let a white
man touch me, and he dies; I don't boast this,--I don't say it around
loud, or before the children,--but I mean it.  I've seen them whip my
father and my old mother in them cotton-rows till the blood ran; by--"
and we passed on.

Now Sears, whom we met next lolling under the chubby oak-trees, was of
quite different fibre.  Happy?--Well, yes; he laughed and flipped
pebbles, and thought the world was as it was.  He had worked here
twelve years and has nothing but a mortgaged mule.  Children?  Yes,
seven; but they hadn't been to school this year,--couldn't afford books
and clothes, and couldn't spare their work.  There go part of them to
the fields now,--three big boys astride mules, and a strapping girl
with bare brown legs.  Careless ignorance and laziness here, fierce
hate and vindictiveness there;--these are the extremes of the Negro
problem which we met that day, and we scarce knew which we preferred.

Here and there we meet distinct characters quite out of the ordinary.
One came out of a piece of newly cleared ground, making a wide detour
to avoid the snakes.  He was an old, hollow-cheeked man, with a drawn
and characterful brown face.  He had a sort of self-contained
quaintness and rough humor impossible to describe; a certain cynical
earnestness that puzzled one.  "The niggers were jealous of me over on
the other place," he said, "and so me and the old woman begged this
piece of woods, and I cleared it up myself.  Made nothing for two
years, but I reckon I've got a crop now."  The cotton looked tall and
rich, and we praised it.  He curtsied low, and then bowed almost to the
ground, with an imperturbable gravity that seemed almost suspicious.
Then he continued, "My mule died last week,"--a calamity in this land
equal to a devastating fire in town,--"but a white man loaned me
another."  Then he added, eyeing us, "Oh, I gets along with white
folks."  We turned the conversation.  "Bears? deer?" he answered,
"well, I should say there were," and he let fly a string of brave
oaths, as he told hunting-tales of the swamp.  We left him standing
still in the middle of the road looking after us, and yet apparently
not noticing us.

The Whistle place, which includes his bit of land, was bought soon
after the war by an English syndicate, the "Dixie Cotton and Corn
Company."  A marvellous deal of style their factor put on, with his
servants and coach-and-six; so much so that the concern soon landed in
inextricable bankruptcy.  Nobody lives in the old house now, but a man
comes each winter out of the North and collects his high rents.  I know
not which are the more touching,--such old empty houses, or the homes
of the masters' sons.  Sad and bitter tales lie hidden back of those
white doors,--tales of poverty, of struggle, of disappointment.  A
revolution such as that of '63 is a terrible thing; they that rose rich
in the morning often slept in paupers' beds.  Beggars and vulgar
speculators rose to rule over them, and their children went astray.
See yonder sad-colored house, with its cabins and fences and glad
crops!  It is not glad within; last month the prodigal son of the
struggling father wrote home from the city for money.  Money!  Where
was it to come from?  And so the son rose in the night and killed his
baby, and killed his wife, and shot himself dead.  And the world passed
on.

I remember wheeling around a bend in the road beside a graceful bit of
forest and a singing brook.  A long low house faced us, with porch and
flying pillars, great oaken door, and a broad lawn shining in the
evening sun.  But the window-panes were gone, the pillars were
worm-eaten, and the moss-grown roof was falling in.  Half curiously I
peered through the unhinged door, and saw where, on the wall across the
hall, was written in once gay letters a faded "Welcome."

Quite a contrast to the southwestern part of Dougherty County is the
northwest.  Soberly timbered in oak and pine, it has none of that
half-tropical luxuriance of the southwest.  Then, too, there are fewer
signs of a romantic past, and more of systematic modern land-grabbing
and money-getting.  White people are more in evidence here, and farmer
and hired labor replace to some extent the absentee landlord and
rack-rented tenant.  The crops have neither the luxuriance of the
richer land nor the signs of neglect so often seen, and there were
fences and meadows here and there.  Most of this land was poor, and
beneath the notice of the slave-baron, before the war.  Since then his
poor relations and foreign immigrants have seized it.  The returns of
the farmer are too small to allow much for wages, and yet he will not
sell off small farms.  There is the Negro Sanford; he has worked
fourteen years as overseer on the Ladson place, and "paid out enough
for fertilizers to have bought a farm," but the owner will not sell off
a few acres.

Two children--a boy and a girl--are hoeing sturdily in the fields on
the farm where Corliss works.  He is smooth-faced and brown, and is
fencing up his pigs.  He used to run a successful cotton-gin, but the
Cotton Seed Oil Trust has forced the price of ginning so low that he
says it hardly pays him.  He points out a stately old house over the
way as the home of "Pa Willis."  We eagerly ride over, for "Pa Willis"
was the tall and powerful black Moses who led the Negroes for a
generation, and led them well.  He was a Baptist preacher, and when he
died, two thousand black people followed him to the grave; and now they
preach his funeral sermon each year.  His widow lives here,--a
weazened, sharp-featured little woman, who curtsied quaintly as we
greeted her.  Further on lives Jack Delson, the most prosperous Negro
farmer in the county.  It is a joy to meet him,--a great
broad-shouldered, handsome black man, intelligent and jovial.  Six
hundred and fifty acres he owns, and has eleven black tenants.  A neat
and tidy home nestled in a flower-garden, and a little store stands
beside it.

We pass the Munson place, where a plucky white widow is renting and
struggling; and the eleven hundred acres of the Sennet plantation, with
its Negro overseer.  Then the character of the farms begins to change.
Nearly all the lands belong to Russian Jews; the overseers are white,
and the cabins are bare board-houses scattered here and there.  The
rents are high, and day-laborers and "contract" hands abound.  It is a
keen, hard struggle for living here, and few have time to talk.  Tired
with the long ride, we gladly drive into Gillonsville.  It is a silent
cluster of farmhouses standing on the crossroads, with one of its
stores closed and the other kept by a Negro preacher.  They tell great
tales of busy times at Gillonsville before all the railroads came to
Albany; now it is chiefly a memory.  Riding down the street, we stop at
the preacher's and seat ourselves before the door.  It was one of those
scenes one cannot soon forget:--a wide, low, little house, whose
motherly roof reached over and sheltered a snug little porch.  There we
sat, after the long hot drive, drinking cool water,--the talkative
little storekeeper who is my daily companion; the silent old black
woman patching pantaloons and saying never a word; the ragged picture
of helpless misfortune who called in just to see the preacher; and
finally the neat matronly preacher's wife, plump, yellow, and
intelligent.  "Own land?" said the wife; "well, only this house."  Then
she added quietly.  "We did buy seven hundred acres across up yonder,
and paid for it; but they cheated us out of it.  Sells was the owner."
"Sells!" echoed the ragged misfortune, who was leaning against the
balustrade and listening, "he's a regular cheat.  I worked for him
thirty-seven days this spring, and he paid me in cardboard checks which
were to be cashed at the end of the month.  But he never cashed
them,--kept putting me off.  Then the sheriff came and took my mule and
corn and furniture--" "Furniture?  But furniture is exempt from seizure
by law."  "Well, he took it just the same," said the hard-faced man.




VIII

Of the Quest of the Golden Fleece

  But the Brute said in his breast, "Till the mills I grind
          have ceased,
  The riches shall be dust of dust, dry ashes be the feast!

     "On the strong and cunning few
     Cynic favors I will strew;
  I will stuff their maw with overplus until their spirit dies;
  From the patient and the low

  I will take the joys they know;
      They shall hunger after vanities and still an-hungered go.
  Madness shall be on the people, ghastly jealousies arise;
  Brother's blood shall cry on brother up the dead and empty skies.

  WILLIAM VAUGHN MOODY.


Have you ever seen a cotton-field white with harvest,--its golden
fleece hovering above the black earth like a silvery cloud edged with
dark green, its bold white signals waving like the foam of billows from
Carolina to Texas across that Black and human Sea?  I have sometimes
half suspected that here the winged ram Chrysomallus left that Fleece
after which Jason and his Argonauts went vaguely wandering into the
shadowy East three thousand years ago; and certainly one might frame a
pretty and not far-fetched analogy of witchery and dragons' teeth, and
blood and armed men, between the ancient and the modern quest of the
Golden Fleece in the Black Sea.

And now the golden fleece is found; not only found, but, in its
birthplace, woven.  For the hum of the cotton-mills is the newest and
most significant thing in the New South to-day.  All through the
Carolinas and Georgia, away down to Mexico, rise these gaunt red
buildings, bare and homely, and yet so busy and noisy withal that they
scarce seem to belong to the slow and sleepy land.  Perhaps they sprang
from dragons' teeth.  So the Cotton Kingdom still lives; the world
still bows beneath her sceptre.  Even the markets that once defied the
parvenu have crept one by one across the seas, and then slowly and
reluctantly, but surely, have started toward the Black Belt.

To be sure, there are those who wag their heads knowingly and tell us
that the capital of the Cotton Kingdom has moved from the Black to the
White Belt,--that the Negro of to-day raises not more than half of the
cotton crop.  Such men forget that the cotton crop has doubled, and
more than doubled, since the era of slavery, and that, even granting
their contention, the Negro is still supreme in a Cotton Kingdom larger
than that on which the Confederacy builded its hopes.  So the Negro
forms to-day one of the chief figures in a great world-industry; and
this, for its own sake, and in the light of historic interest, makes
the field-hands of the cotton country worth studying.

We seldom study the condition of the Negro to-day honestly and
carefully.  It is so much easier to assume that we know it all.  Or
perhaps, having already reached conclusions in our own minds, we are
loth to have them disturbed by facts.  And yet how little we really
know of these millions,--of their daily lives and longings, of their
homely joys and sorrows, of their real shortcomings and the meaning of
their crimes!  All this we can only learn by intimate contact with the
masses, and not by wholesale arguments covering millions separate in
time and space, and differing widely in training and culture.  To-day,
then, my reader, let us turn our faces to the Black Belt of Georgia and
seek simply to know the condition of the black farm-laborers of one
county there.

Here in 1890 lived ten thousand Negroes and two thousand whites.  The
country is rich, yet the people are poor.  The keynote of the Black
Belt is debt; not commercial credit, but debt in the sense of continued
inability on the part of the mass of the population to make income
cover expense.  This is the direct heritage of the South from the
wasteful economies of the slave regime; but it was emphasized and
brought to a crisis by the Emancipation of the slaves.  In 1860,
Dougherty County had six thousand slaves, worth at least two and a half
millions of dollars; its farms were estimated at three
millions,--making five and a half millions of property, the value of
which depended largely on the slave system, and on the speculative
demand for land once marvellously rich but already partially
devitalized by careless and exhaustive culture.  The war then meant a
financial crash; in place of the five and a half millions of 1860,
there remained in 1870 only farms valued at less than two millions.
With this came increased competition in cotton culture from the rich
lands of Texas; a steady fall in the normal price of cotton followed,
from about fourteen cents a pound in 1860 until it reached four cents
in 1898.  Such a financial revolution was it that involved the owners
of the cotton-belt in debt.  And if things went ill with the master,
how fared it with the man?

The plantations of Dougherty County in slavery days were not as
imposing and aristocratic as those of Virginia.  The Big House was
smaller and usually one-storied, and sat very near the slave cabins.
Sometimes these cabins stretched off on either side like wings;
sometimes only on one side, forming a double row, or edging the road
that turned into the plantation from the main thoroughfare.  The form
and disposition of the laborers' cabins throughout the Black Belt is
to-day the same as in slavery days.  Some live in the self-same cabins,
others in cabins rebuilt on the sites of the old.  All are sprinkled in
little groups over the face of the land, centering about some
dilapidated Big House where the head-tenant or agent lives.  The
general character and arrangement of these dwellings remains on the
whole unaltered.  There were in the county, outside the corporate town
of Albany, about fifteen hundred Negro families in 1898.  Out of all
these, only a single family occupied a house with seven rooms; only
fourteen have five rooms or more.  The mass live in one- and two-room
homes.

The size and arrangements of a people's homes are no unfair index of
their condition.  If, then, we inquire more carefully into these Negro
homes, we find much that is unsatisfactory.  All over the face of the
land is the one-room cabin,--now standing in the shadow of the Big
House, now staring at the dusty road, now rising dark and sombre amid
the green of the cotton-fields.  It is nearly always old and bare,
built of rough boards, and neither plastered nor ceiled.  Light and
ventilation are supplied by the single door and by the square hole in
the wall with its wooden shutter.  There is no glass, porch, or
ornamentation without.  Within is a fireplace, black and smoky, and
usually unsteady with age.  A bed or two, a table, a wooden chest, and
a few chairs compose the furniture; while a stray show-bill or a
newspaper makes up the decorations for the walls.  Now and then one may
find such a cabin kept scrupulously neat, with merry steaming
fireplaces and hospitable door; but the majority are dirty and
dilapidated, smelling of eating and sleeping, poorly ventilated, and
anything but homes.

Above all, the cabins are crowded.  We have come to associate crowding
with homes in cities almost exclusively.  This is primarily because we
have so little accurate knowledge of country life.  Here in Dougherty
County one may find families of eight and ten occupying one or two
rooms, and for every ten rooms of house accommodation for the Negroes
there are twenty-five persons.  The worst tenement abominations of New
York do not have above twenty-two persons for every ten rooms.  Of
course, one small, close room in a city, without a yard, is in many
respects worse than the larger single country room.  In other respects
it is better; it has glass windows, a decent chimney, and a trustworthy
floor.  The single great advantage of the Negro peasant is that he may
spend most of his life outside his hovel, in the open fields.

There are four chief causes of these wretched homes: First, long custom
born of slavery has assigned such homes to Negroes; white laborers
would be offered better accommodations, and might, for that and similar
reasons, give better work.  Secondly, the Negroes, used to such
accommodations, do not as a rule demand better; they do not know what
better houses mean.  Thirdly, the landlords as a class have not yet
come to realize that it is a good business investment to raise the
standard of living among labor by slow and judicious methods; that a
Negro laborer who demands three rooms and fifty cents a day would give
more efficient work and leave a larger profit than a discouraged toiler
herding his family in one room and working for thirty cents.  Lastly,
among such conditions of life there are few incentives to make the
laborer become a better farmer.  If he is ambitious, he moves to town
or tries other labor; as a tenant-farmer his outlook is almost
hopeless, and following it as a makeshift, he takes the house that is
given him without protest.

In such homes, then, these Negro peasants live.  The families are both
small and large; there are many single tenants,--widows and bachelors,
and remnants of broken groups.  The system of labor and the size of the
houses both tend to the breaking up of family groups: the grown
children go away as contract hands or migrate to town, the sister goes
into service; and so one finds many families with hosts of babies, and
many newly married couples, but comparatively few families with
half-grown and grown sons and daughters.  The average size of Negro
families has undoubtedly decreased since the war, primarily from
economic stress.  In Russia over a third of the bridegrooms and over
half the brides are under twenty; the same was true of the antebellum
Negroes.  Today, however, very few of the boys and less than a fifth of
the Negro girls under twenty are married.  The young men marry between
the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five; the young women between twenty
and thirty.  Such postponement is due to the difficulty of earning
sufficient to rear and support a family; and it undoubtedly leads, in
the country districts, to sexual immorality.  The form of this
immorality, however, is very seldom that of prostitution, and less
frequently that of illegitimacy than one would imagine.  Rather, it
takes the form of separation and desertion after a family group has
been formed.  The number of separated persons is thirty-five to the
thousand,--a very large number.  It would of course be unfair to
compare this number with divorce statistics, for many of these
separated women are in reality widowed, were the truth known, and in
other cases the separation is not permanent.  Nevertheless, here lies
the seat of greatest moral danger.  There is little or no prostitution
among these Negroes, and over three-fourths of the families, as found
by house-to-house investigation, deserve to be classed as decent people
with considerable regard for female chastity.  To be sure, the ideas of
the mass would not suit New England, and there are many loose habits
and notions.  Yet the rate of illegitimacy is undoubtedly lower than in
Austria or Italy, and the women as a class are modest.  The plague-spot
in sexual relations is easy marriage and easy separation.  This is no
sudden development, nor the fruit of Emancipation.  It is the plain
heritage from slavery.  In those days Sam, with his master's consent,
"took up" with Mary.  No ceremony was necessary, and in the busy life
of the great plantations of the Black Belt it was usually dispensed
with.  If now the master needed Sam's work in another plantation or in
another part of the same plantation, or if he took a notion to sell the
slave, Sam's married life with Mary was usually unceremoniously broken,
and then it was clearly to the master's interest to have both of them
take new mates.  This widespread custom of two centuries has not been
eradicated in thirty years.  To-day Sam's grandson "takes up" with a
woman without license or ceremony; they live together decently and
honestly, and are, to all intents and purposes, man and wife.
Sometimes these unions are never broken until death; but in too many
cases family quarrels, a roving spirit, a rival suitor, or perhaps more
frequently the hopeless battle to support a family, lead to separation,
and a broken household is the result.  The Negro church has done much
to stop this practice, and now most marriage ceremonies are performed
by the pastors.  Nevertheless, the evil is still deep seated, and only
a general raising of the standard of living will finally cure it.

Looking now at the county black population as a whole, it is fair to
characterize it as poor and ignorant.  Perhaps ten per cent compose the
well-to-do and the best of the laborers, while at least nine per cent
are thoroughly lewd and vicious.  The rest, over eighty per cent, are
poor and ignorant, fairly honest and well meaning, plodding, and to a
degree shiftless, with some but not great sexual looseness.  Such class
lines are by no means fixed; they vary, one might almost say, with the
price of cotton.  The degree of ignorance cannot easily be expressed.
We may say, for instance, that nearly two-thirds of them cannot read or
write.  This but partially expresses the fact.  They are ignorant of
the world about them, of modern economic organization, of the function
of government, of individual worth and possibilities,--of nearly all
those things which slavery in self-defence had to keep them from
learning.  Much that the white boy imbibes from his earliest social
atmosphere forms the puzzling problems of the black boy's mature years.
America is not another word for Opportunity to all her sons.

It is easy for us to lose ourselves in details in endeavoring to grasp
and comprehend the real condition of a mass of human beings.  We often
forget that each unit in the mass is a throbbing human soul.  Ignorant
it may be, and poverty stricken, black and curious in limb and ways and
thought; and yet it loves and hates, it toils and tires, it laughs and
weeps its bitter tears, and looks in vague and awful longing at the
grim horizon of its life,--all this, even as you and I. These black
thousands are not in reality lazy; they are improvident and careless;
they insist on breaking the monotony of toil with a glimpse at the
great town-world on Saturday; they have their loafers and their
rascals; but the great mass of them work continuously and faithfully
for a return, and under circumstances that would call forth equal
voluntary effort from few if any other modern laboring class.  Over
eighty-eight per cent of them--men, women, and children--are farmers.
Indeed, this is almost the only industry.  Most of the children get
their schooling after the "crops are laid by," and very few there are
that stay in school after the spring work has begun.  Child-labor is to
be found here in some of its worst phases, as fostering ignorance and
stunting physical development.  With the grown men of the county there
is little variety in work: thirteen hundred are farmers, and two
hundred are laborers, teamsters, etc., including twenty-four artisans,
ten merchants, twenty-one preachers, and four teachers.  This
narrowness of life reaches its maximum among the women: thirteen
hundred and fifty of these are farm laborers, one hundred are servants
and washerwomen, leaving sixty-five housewives, eight teachers, and six
seamstresses.

Among this people there is no leisure class.  We often forget that in
the United States over half the youth and adults are not in the world
earning incomes, but are making homes, learning of the world, or
resting after the heat of the strife.  But here ninety-six per cent are
toiling; no one with leisure to turn the bare and cheerless cabin into
a home, no old folks to sit beside the fire and hand down traditions of
the past; little of careless happy childhood and dreaming youth.  The
dull monotony of daily toil is broken only by the gayety of the
thoughtless and the Saturday trip to town.  The toil, like all farm
toil, is monotonous, and here there are little machinery and few tools
to relieve its burdensome drudgery.  But with all this, it is work in
the pure open air, and this is something in a day when fresh air is
scarce.

The land on the whole is still fertile, despite long abuse.  For nine
or ten months in succession the crops will come if asked: garden
vegetables in April, grain in May, melons in June and July, hay in
August, sweet potatoes in September, and cotton from then to Christmas.
And yet on two-thirds of the land there is but one crop, and that
leaves the toilers in debt.  Why is this?

Away down the Baysan road, where the broad flat fields are flanked by
great oak forests, is a plantation; many thousands of acres it used to
run, here and there, and beyond the great wood.  Thirteen hundred human
beings here obeyed the call of one,--were his in body, and largely in
soul.  One of them lives there yet,--a short, stocky man, his
dull-brown face seamed and drawn, and his tightly curled hair
gray-white.  The crops?  Just tolerable, he said; just tolerable.
Getting on?  No--he wasn't getting on at all.  Smith of Albany
"furnishes" him, and his rent is eight hundred pounds of cotton.  Can't
make anything at that.  Why didn't he buy land!  Humph!  Takes money to
buy land.  And he turns away.  Free!  The most piteous thing amid all
the black ruin of war-time, amid the broken fortunes of the masters,
the blighted hopes of mothers and maidens, and the fall of an
empire,--the most piteous thing amid all this was the black freedman
who threw down his hoe because the world called him free.  What did
such a mockery of freedom mean?  Not a cent of money, not an inch of
land, not a mouthful of victuals,--not even ownership of the rags on
his back.  Free!  On Saturday, once or twice a month, the old master,
before the war, used to dole out bacon and meal to his Negroes.  And
after the first flush of freedom wore off, and his true helplessness
dawned on the freedman, he came back and picked up his hoe, and old
master still doled out his bacon and meal.  The legal form of service
was theoretically far different; in practice, task-work or "cropping"
was substituted for daily toil in gangs; and the slave gradually became
a metayer, or tenant on shares, in name, but a laborer with
indeterminate wages in fact.

Still the price of cotton fell, and gradually the landlords deserted
their plantations, and the reign of the merchant began.  The merchant
of the Black Belt is a curious institution,--part banker, part
landlord, part banker, and part despot.  His store, which used most
frequently to stand at the cross-roads and become the centre of a
weekly village, has now moved to town; and thither the Negro tenant
follows him.  The merchant keeps everything,--clothes and shoes, coffee
and sugar, pork and meal, canned and dried goods, wagons and ploughs,
seed and fertilizer,--and what he has not in stock he can give you an
order for at the store across the way.  Here, then, comes the tenant,
Sam Scott, after he has contracted with some absent landlord's agent
for hiring forty acres of land; he fingers his hat nervously until the
merchant finishes his morning chat with Colonel Saunders, and calls
out, "Well, Sam, what do you want?"  Sam wants him to "furnish"
him,--i.e., to advance him food and clothing for the year, and perhaps
seed and tools, until his crop is raised and sold.  If Sam seems a
favorable subject, he and the merchant go to a lawyer, and Sam executes
a chattel mortgage on his mule and wagon in return for seed and a
week's rations.  As soon as the green cotton-leaves appear above the
ground, another mortgage is given on the "crop."  Every Saturday, or at
longer intervals, Sam calls upon the merchant for his "rations"; a
family of five usually gets about thirty pounds of fat side-pork and a
couple of bushels of cornmeal a month.  Besides this, clothing and
shoes must be furnished; if Sam or his family is sick, there are orders
on the druggist and doctor; if the mule wants shoeing, an order on the
blacksmith, etc.  If Sam is a hard worker and crops promise well, he is
often encouraged to buy more,--sugar, extra clothes, perhaps a buggy.
But he is seldom encouraged to save.  When cotton rose to ten cents
last fall, the shrewd merchants of Dougherty County sold a thousand
buggies in one season, mostly to black men.

The security offered for such transactions--a crop and chattel
mortgage--may at first seem slight.  And, indeed, the merchants tell
many a true tale of shiftlessness and cheating; of cotton picked at
night, mules disappearing, and tenants absconding.  But on the whole
the merchant of the Black Belt is the most prosperous man in the
section.  So skilfully and so closely has he drawn the bonds of the law
about the tenant, that the black man has often simply to choose between
pauperism and crime; he "waives" all homestead exemptions in his
contract; he cannot touch his own mortgaged crop, which the laws put
almost in the full control of the land-owner and of the merchant.  When
the crop is growing the merchant watches it like a hawk; as soon as it
is ready for market he takes possession of it, sells it, pays the
landowner his rent, subtracts his bill for supplies, and if, as
sometimes happens, there is anything left, he hands it over to the
black serf for his Christmas celebration.

The direct result of this system is an all-cotton scheme of agriculture
and the continued bankruptcy of the tenant.  The currency of the Black
Belt is cotton.  It is a crop always salable for ready money, not
usually subject to great yearly fluctuations in price, and one which
the Negroes know how to raise.  The landlord therefore demands his rent
in cotton, and the merchant will accept mortgages on no other crop.
There is no use asking the black tenant, then, to diversify his
crops,--he cannot under this system.  Moreover, the system is bound to
bankrupt the tenant.  I remember once meeting a little one-mule wagon
on the River road.  A young black fellow sat in it driving listlessly,
his elbows on his knees.  His dark-faced wife sat beside him, stolid,
silent.

"Hello!" cried my driver,--he has a most imprudent way of addressing
these people, though they seem used to it,--"what have you got there?"

"Meat and meal," answered the man, stopping.  The meat lay uncovered in
the bottom of the wagon,--a great thin side of fat pork covered with
salt; the meal was in a white bushel bag.

"What did you pay for that meat?"

"Ten cents a pound."  It could have been bought for six or seven cents
cash.

"And the meal?"

"Two dollars."  One dollar and ten cents is the cash price in town.
Here was a man paying five dollars for goods which he could have bought
for three dollars cash, and raised for one dollar or one dollar and a
half.

Yet it is not wholly his fault.  The Negro farmer started
behind,--started in debt.  This was not his choosing, but the crime of
this happy-go-lucky nation which goes blundering along with its
Reconstruction tragedies, its Spanish war interludes and Philippine
matinees, just as though God really were dead.  Once in debt, it is no
easy matter for a whole race to emerge.

In the year of low-priced cotton, 1898, out of three hundred tenant
families one hundred and seventy-five ended their year's work in debt
to the extent of fourteen thousand dollars; fifty cleared nothing, and
the remaining seventy-five made a total profit of sixteen hundred
dollars.  The net indebtedness of the black tenant families of the
whole county must have been at least sixty thousand dollars.  In a more
prosperous year the situation is far better; but on the average the
majority of tenants end the year even, or in debt, which means that
they work for board and clothes.  Such an economic organization is
radically wrong.  Whose is the blame?

The underlying causes of this situation are complicated but
discernible.  And one of the chief, outside the carelessness of the
nation in letting the slave start with nothing, is the widespread
opinion among the merchants and employers of the Black Belt that only
by the slavery of debt can the Negro be kept at work.  Without doubt,
some pressure was necessary at the beginning of the free-labor system
to keep the listless and lazy at work; and even to-day the mass of the
Negro laborers need stricter guardianship than most Northern laborers.
Behind this honest and widespread opinion dishonesty and cheating of
the ignorant laborers have a good chance to take refuge.  And to all
this must be added the obvious fact that a slave ancestry and a system
of unrequited toil has not improved the efficiency or temper of the
mass of black laborers.  Nor is this peculiar to Sambo; it has in
history been just as true of John and Hans, of Jacques and Pat, of all
ground-down peasantries.  Such is the situation of the mass of the
Negroes in the Black Belt to-day; and they are thinking about it.
Crime, and a cheap and dangerous socialism, are the inevitable results
of this pondering.  I see now that ragged black man sitting on a log,
aimlessly whittling a stick.  He muttered to me with the murmur of many
ages, when he said: "White man sit down whole year; Nigger work day and
night and make crop; Nigger hardly gits bread and meat; white man
sittin' down gits all. It's wrong." And what do the better classes of
Negroes do to improve their situation?  One of two things: if any way
possible, they buy land; if not, they migrate to town.  Just as
centuries ago it was no easy thing for the serf to escape into the
freedom of town-life, even so to-day there are hindrances laid in the
way of county laborers.  In considerable parts of all the Gulf States,
and especially in Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas, the Negroes on
the plantations in the back-country districts are still held at forced
labor practically without wages.  Especially is this true in districts
where the farmers are composed of the more ignorant class of poor
whites, and the Negroes are beyond the reach of schools and intercourse
with their advancing fellows.  If such a peon should run away, the
sheriff, elected by white suffrage, can usually be depended on to catch
the fugitive, return him, and ask no questions.  If he escape to
another county, a charge of petty thieving, easily true, can be
depended upon to secure his return.  Even if some unduly officious
person insist upon a trial, neighborly comity will probably make his
conviction sure, and then the labor due the county can easily be bought
by the master.  Such a system is impossible in the more civilized parts
of the South, or near the large towns and cities; but in those vast
stretches of land beyond the telegraph and the newspaper the spirit of
the Thirteenth Amendment is sadly broken.  This represents the lowest
economic depths of the black American peasant; and in a study of the
rise and condition of the Negro freeholder we must trace his economic
progress from the modern serfdom.

Even in the better-ordered country districts of the South the free
movement of agricultural laborers is hindered by the migration-agent
laws.  The "Associated Press" recently informed the world of the arrest
of a young white man in Southern Georgia who represented the "Atlantic
Naval Supplies Company," and who "was caught in the act of enticing
hands from the turpentine farm of Mr. John Greer."  The crime for which
this young man was arrested is taxed five hundred dollars for each
county in which the employment agent proposes to gather laborers for
work outside the State.  Thus the Negroes' ignorance of the
labor-market outside his own vicinity is increased rather than
diminished by the laws of nearly every Southern State.

Similar to such measures is the unwritten law of the back districts and
small towns of the South, that the character of all Negroes unknown to
the mass of the community must be vouched for by some white man.  This
is really a revival of the old Roman idea of the patron under whose
protection the new-made freedman was put.  In many instances this
system has been of great good to the Negro, and very often under the
protection and guidance of the former master's family, or other white
friends, the freedman progressed in wealth and morality.  But the same
system has in other cases resulted in the refusal of whole communities
to recognize the right of a Negro to change his habitation and to be
master of his own fortunes.  A black stranger in Baker County, Georgia,
for instance, is liable to be stopped anywhere on the public highway
and made to state his business to the satisfaction of any white
interrogator.  If he fails to give a suitable answer, or seems too
independent or "sassy," he may be arrested or summarily driven away.

Thus it is that in the country districts of the South, by written or
unwritten law, peonage, hindrances to the migration of labor, and a
system of white patronage exists over large areas.  Besides this, the
chance for lawless oppression and illegal exactions is vastly greater
in the country than in the city, and nearly all the more serious race
disturbances of the last decade have arisen from disputes in the count
between master and man,--as, for instance, the Sam Hose affair.  As a
result of such a situation, there arose, first, the Black Belt; and,
second, the Migration to Town.  The Black Belt was not, as many
assumed, a movement toward fields of labor under more genial climatic
conditions; it was primarily a huddling for self-protection,--a massing
of the black population for mutual defence in order to secure the peace
and tranquillity necessary to economic advance.  This movement took
place between Emancipation and 1880, and only partially accomplished
the desired results.  The rush to town since 1880 is the
counter-movement of men disappointed in the economic opportunities of
the Black Belt.

In Dougherty County, Georgia, one can see easily the results of this
experiment in huddling for protection.  Only ten per cent of the adult
population was born in the county, and yet the blacks outnumber the
whites four or five to one.  There is undoubtedly a security to the
blacks in their very numbers,--a personal freedom from arbitrary
treatment, which makes hundreds of laborers cling to Dougherty in spite
of low wages and economic distress.  But a change is coming, and slowly
but surely even here the agricultural laborers are drifting to town and
leaving the broad acres behind.  Why is this?  Why do not the Negroes
become land-owners, and build up the black landed peasantry, which has
for a generation and more been the dream of philanthropist and
statesman?

To the car-window sociologist, to the man who seeks to understand and
know the South by devoting the few leisure hours of a holiday trip to
unravelling the snarl of centuries,--to such men very often the whole
trouble with the black field-hand may be summed up by Aunt Ophelia's
word, "Shiftless!"  They have noted repeatedly scenes like one I saw
last summer.  We were riding along the highroad to town at the close of
a long hot day.  A couple of young black fellows passed us in a
muleteam, with several bushels of loose corn in the ear.  One was
driving, listlessly bent forward, his elbows on his knees,--a
happy-go-lucky, careless picture of irresponsibility.  The other was
fast asleep in the bottom of the wagon.  As we passed we noticed an ear
of corn fall from the wagon.  They never saw it,--not they.  A rod
farther on we noted another ear on the ground; and between that
creeping mule and town we counted twenty-six ears of corn.  Shiftless?
Yes, the personification of shiftlessness.  And yet follow those boys:
they are not lazy; to-morrow morning they'll be up with the sun; they
work hard when they do work, and they work willingly.  They have no
sordid, selfish, money-getting ways, but rather a fine disdain for mere
cash.  They'll loaf before your face and work behind your back with
good-natured honesty.  They'll steal a watermelon, and hand you back
your lost purse intact.  Their great defect as laborers lies in their
lack of incentive beyond the mere pleasure of physical exertion.  They
are careless because they have not found that it pays to be careful;
they are improvident because the improvident ones of their acquaintance
get on about as well as the provident.  Above all, they cannot see why
they should take unusual pains to make the white man's land better, or
to fatten his mule, or save his corn.  On the other hand, the white
land-owner argues that any attempt to improve these laborers by
increased responsibility, or higher wages, or better homes, or land of
their own, would be sure to result in failure.  He shows his Northern
visitor the scarred and wretched land; the ruined mansions, the
worn-out soil and mortgaged acres, and says, This is Negro freedom!

Now it happens that both master and man have just enough argument on
their respective sides to make it difficult for them to understand each
other.  The Negro dimly personifies in the white man all his ills and
misfortunes; if he is poor, it is because the white man seizes the
fruit of his toil; if he is ignorant, it is because the white man gives
him neither time nor facilities to learn; and, indeed, if any
misfortune happens to him, it is because of some hidden machinations of
"white folks."  On the other hand, the masters and the masters' sons
have never been able to see why the Negro, instead of settling down to
be day-laborers for bread and clothes, are infected with a silly desire
to rise in the world, and why they are sulky, dissatisfied, and
careless, where their fathers were happy and dumb and faithful.  "Why,
you niggers have an easier time than I do," said a puzzled Albany
merchant to his black customer.  "Yes," he replied, "and so does yo'
hogs."

Taking, then, the dissatisfied and shiftless field-hand as a
starting-point, let us inquire how the black thousands of Dougherty
have struggled from him up toward their ideal, and what that ideal is.
All social struggle is evidenced by the rise, first of economic, then
of social classes, among a homogeneous population.  To-day the
following economic classes are plainly differentiated among these
Negroes.

A "submerged tenth" of croppers, with a few paupers; forty per cent who
are metayers and thirty-nine per cent of semi-metayers and
wage-laborers.  There are left five per cent of money-renters and six
per cent of freeholders,--the "Upper Ten" of the land.  The croppers
are entirely without capital, even in the limited sense of food or
money to keep them from seed-time to harvest.  All they furnish is
their labor; the land-owner furnishes land, stock, tools, seed, and
house; and at the end of the year the laborer gets from a third to a
half of the crop.  Out of his share, however, comes pay and interest
for food and clothing advanced him during the year.  Thus we have a
laborer without capital and without wages, and an employer whose
capital is largely his employees' wages.  It is an unsatisfactory
arrangement, both for hirer and hired, and is usually in vogue on poor
land with hard-pressed owners.

Above the croppers come the great mass of the black population who work
the land on their own responsibility, paying rent in cotton and
supported by the crop-mortgage system.  After the war this system was
attractive to the freedmen on account of its larger freedom and its
possibility for making a surplus.  But with the carrying out of the
crop-lien system, the deterioration of the land, and the slavery of
debt, the position of the metayers has sunk to a dead level of
practically unrewarded toil.  Formerly all tenants had some capital,
and often considerable; but absentee landlordism, rising rack-rent, and
failing cotton have stripped them well-nigh of all, and probably not
over half of them to-day own their mules.  The change from cropper to
tenant was accomplished by fixing the rent.  If, now, the rent fixed
was reasonable, this was an incentive to the tenant to strive.  On the
other hand, if the rent was too high, or if the land deteriorated, the
result was to discourage and check the efforts of the black peasantry.
There is no doubt that the latter case is true; that in Dougherty
County every economic advantage of the price of cotton in market and of
the strivings of the tenant has been taken advantage of by the
landlords and merchants, and swallowed up in rent and interest.  If
cotton rose in price, the rent rose even higher; if cotton fell, the
rent remained or followed reluctantly.  If the tenant worked hard and
raised a large crop, his rent was raised the next year; if that year
the crop failed, his corn was confiscated and his mule sold for debt.
There were, of course, exceptions to this,--cases of personal kindness
and forbearance; but in the vast majority of cases the rule was to
extract the uttermost farthing from the mass of the black farm laborers.

The average metayer pays from twenty to thirty per cent of his crop in
rent.  The result of such rack-rent can only be evil,--abuse and
neglect of the soil, deterioration in the character of the laborers,
and a widespread sense of injustice.  "Wherever the country is poor,"
cried Arthur Young, "it is in the hands of metayers," and "their
condition is more wretched than that of day-laborers."  He was talking
of Italy a century ago; but he might have been talking of Dougherty
County to-day.  And especially is that true to-day which he declares
was true in France before the Revolution: "The metayers are considered
as little better than menial servants, removable at pleasure, and
obliged to conform in all things to the will of the landlords."  On
this low plane half the black population of Dougherty County--perhaps
more than half the black millions of this land--are to-day struggling.

A degree above these we may place those laborers who receive money
wages for their work.  Some receive a house with perhaps a garden-spot;
then supplies of food and clothing are advanced, and certain fixed
wages are given at the end of the year, varying from thirty to sixty
dollars, out of which the supplies must be paid for, with interest.
About eighteen per cent of the population belong to this class of
semi-metayers, while twenty-two per cent are laborers paid by the month
or year, and are either "furnished" by their own savings or perhaps
more usually by some merchant who takes his chances of payment.  Such
laborers receive from thirty-five to fifty cents a day during the
working season.  They are usually young unmarried persons, some being
women; and when they marry they sink to the class of metayers, or, more
seldom, become renters.

The renters for fixed money rentals are the first of the emerging
classes, and form five per cent of the families.  The sole advantage of
this small class is their freedom to choose their crops, and the
increased responsibility which comes through having money transactions.
While some of the renters differ little in condition from the metayers,
yet on the whole they are more intelligent and responsible persons, and
are the ones who eventually become land-owners.  Their better character
and greater shrewdness enable them to gain, perhaps to demand, better
terms in rents; rented farms, varying from forty to a hundred acres,
bear an average rental of about fifty-four dollars a year.  The men who
conduct such farms do not long remain renters; either they sink to
metayers, or with a successful series of harvests rise to be
land-owners.

In 1870 the tax-books of Dougherty report no Negroes as landholders.
If there were any such at that time,--and there may have been a
few,--their land was probably held in the name of some white patron,--a
method not uncommon during slavery.  In 1875 ownership of land had
begun with seven hundred and fifty acres; ten years later this had
increased to over sixty-five hundred acres, to nine thousand acres in
1890 and ten thousand in 1900.  The total assessed property has in this
same period risen from eighty thousand dollars in 1875 to two hundred
and forty thousand dollars in 1900.

Two circumstances complicate this development and make it in some
respects difficult to be sure of the real tendencies; they are the
panic of 1893, and the low price of cotton in 1898.  Besides this, the
system of assessing property in the country districts of Georgia is
somewhat antiquated and of uncertain statistical value; there are no
assessors, and each man makes a sworn return to a tax-receiver.  Thus
public opinion plays a large part, and the returns vary strangely from
year to year.  Certainly these figures show the small amount of
accumulated capital among the Negroes, and the consequent large
dependence of their property on temporary prosperity.  They have little
to tide over a few years of economic depression, and are at the mercy
of the cotton-market far more than the whites.  And thus the
land-owners, despite their marvellous efforts, are really a transient
class, continually being depleted by those who fall back into the class
of renters or metayers, and augmented by newcomers from the masses.  Of
one hundred land-owners in 1898, half had bought their land since 1893,
a fourth between 1890 and 1893, a fifth between 1884 and 1890, and the
rest between 1870 and 1884.  In all, one hundred and eighty-five
Negroes have owned land in this county since 1875.

If all the black land-owners who had ever held land here had kept it or
left it in the hands of black men, the Negroes would have owned nearer
thirty thousand acres than the fifteen thousand they now hold.  And yet
these fifteen thousand acres are a creditable showing,--a proof of no
little weight of the worth and ability of the Negro people.  If they
had been given an economic start at Emancipation, if they had been in
an enlightened and rich community which really desired their best good,
then we might perhaps call such a result small or even insignificant.
But for a few thousand poor ignorant field-hands, in the face of
poverty, a falling market, and social stress, to save and capitalize
two hundred thousand dollars in a generation has meant a tremendous
effort.  The rise of a nation, the pressing forward of a social class,
means a bitter struggle, a hard and soul-sickening battle with the
world such as few of the more favored classes know or appreciate.

Out of the hard economic conditions of this portion of the Black Belt,
only six per cent of the population have succeeded in emerging into
peasant proprietorship; and these are not all firmly fixed, but grow
and shrink in number with the wavering of the cotton-market.  Fully
ninety-four per cent have struggled for land and failed, and half of
them sit in hopeless serfdom.  For these there is one other avenue of
escape toward which they have turned in increasing numbers, namely,
migration to town.  A glance at the distribution of land among the
black owners curiously reveals this fact.  In 1898 the holdings were as
follows: Under forty acres, forty-nine families; forty to two hundred
and fifty acres, seventeen families; two hundred and fifty to one
thousand acres, thirteen families; one thousand or more acres, two
families.  Now in 1890 there were forty-four holdings, but only nine of
these were under forty acres.  The great increase of holdings, then,
has come in the buying of small homesteads near town, where their
owners really share in the town life; this is a part of the rush to
town.  And for every land-owner who has thus hurried away from the
narrow and hard conditions of country life, how many field-hands, how
many tenants, how many ruined renters, have joined that long
procession?  Is it not strange compensation?  The sin of the country
districts is visited on the town, and the social sores of city life
to-day may, here in Dougherty County, and perhaps in many places near
and far, look for their final healing without the city walls.




IX

Of the Sons of Master and Man

  Life treads on life, and heart on heart;
  We press too close in church and mart
  To keep a dream or grave apart.

  MRS. BROWNING.


The world-old phenomenon of the contact of diverse races of men is to
have new exemplification during the new century.  Indeed, the
characteristic of our age is the contact of European civilization with
the world's undeveloped peoples.  Whatever we may say of the results of
such contact in the past, it certainly forms a chapter in human action
not pleasant to look back upon.  War, murder, slavery, extermination,
and debauchery,--this has again and again been the result of carrying
civilization and the blessed gospel to the isles of the sea and the
heathen without the law.  Nor does it altogether satisfy the conscience
of the modern world to be told complacently that all this has been
right and proper, the fated triumph of strength over weakness, of
righteousness over evil, of superiors over inferiors.  It would
certainly be soothing if one could readily believe all this; and yet
there are too many ugly facts for everything to be thus easily
explained away.  We feel and know that there are many delicate
differences in race psychology, numberless changes that our crude
social measurements are not yet able to follow minutely, which explain
much of history and social development.  At the same time, too, we know
that these considerations have never adequately explained or excused
the triumph of brute force and cunning over weakness and innocence.

It is, then, the strife of all honorable men of the twentieth century
to see that in the future competition of races the survival of the
fittest shall mean the triumph of the good, the beautiful, and the
true; that we may be able to preserve for future civilization all that
is really fine and noble and strong, and not continue to put a premium
on greed and impudence and cruelty.  To bring this hope to fruition, we
are compelled daily to turn more and more to a conscientious study of
the phenomena of race-contact,--to a study frank and fair, and not
falsified and colored by our wishes or our fears.  And we have in the
South as fine a field for such a study as the world affords,--a field,
to be sure, which the average American scientist deems somewhat beneath
his dignity, and which the average man who is not a scientist knows all
about, but nevertheless a line of study which by reason of the enormous
race complications with which God seems about to punish this nation
must increasingly claim our sober attention, study, and thought, we
must ask, what are the actual relations of whites and blacks in the
South? and we must be answered, not by apology or fault-finding, but by
a plain, unvarnished tale.

In the civilized life of to-day the contact of men and their relations
to each other fall in a few main lines of action and communication:
there is, first, the physical proximity of home and dwelling-places,
the way in which neighborhoods group themselves, and the contiguity of
neighborhoods.  Secondly, and in our age chiefest, there are the
economic relations,--the methods by which individuals cooperate for
earning a living, for the mutual satisfaction of wants, for the
production of wealth.  Next, there are the political relations, the
cooperation in social control, in group government, in laying and
paying the burden of taxation.  In the fourth place there are the less
tangible but highly important forms of intellectual contact and
commerce, the interchange of ideas through conversation and conference,
through periodicals and libraries; and, above all, the gradual
formation for each community of that curious tertium quid which we call
public opinion.  Closely allied with this come the various forms of
social contact in everyday life, in travel, in theatres, in house
gatherings, in marrying and giving in marriage.  Finally, there are the
varying forms of religious enterprise, of moral teaching and benevolent
endeavor.  These are the principal ways in which men living in the same
communities are brought into contact with each other.  It is my present
task, therefore, to indicate, from my point of view, how the black race
in the South meet and mingle with the whites in these matters of
everyday life.

First, as to physical dwelling.  It is usually possible to draw in
nearly every Southern community a physical color-line on the map, on
the one side of which whites dwell and on the other Negroes.  The
winding and intricacy of the geographical color-line varies, of course,
in different communities.  I know some towns where a straight line
drawn through the middle of the main street separates nine-tenths of
the whites from nine-tenths of the blacks.  In other towns the older
settlement of whites has been encircled by a broad band of blacks; in
still other cases little settlements or nuclei of blacks have sprung up
amid surrounding whites.  Usually in cities each street has its
distinctive color, and only now and then do the colors meet in close
proximity.  Even in the country something of this segregation is
manifest in the smaller areas, and of course in the larger phenomena of
the Black Belt.

All this segregation by color is largely independent of that natural
clustering by social grades common to all communities.  A Negro slum
may be in dangerous proximity to a white residence quarter, while it is
quite common to find a white slum planted in the heart of a respectable
Negro district.  One thing, however, seldom occurs: the best of the
whites and the best of the Negroes almost never live in anything like
close proximity.  It thus happens that in nearly every Southern town
and city, both whites and blacks see commonly the worst of each other.
This is a vast change from the situation in the past, when, through the
close contact of master and house-servant in the patriarchal big house,
one found the best of both races in close contact and sympathy, while
at the same time the squalor and dull round of toil among the
field-hands was removed from the sight and hearing of the family.  One
can easily see how a person who saw slavery thus from his father's
parlors, and sees freedom on the streets of a great city, fails to
grasp or comprehend the whole of the new picture.  On the other hand,
the settled belief of the mass of the Negroes that the Southern white
people do not have the black man's best interests at heart has been
intensified in later years by this continual daily contact of the
better class of blacks with the worst representatives of the white race.

Coming now to the economic relations of the races, we are on ground
made familiar by study, much discussion, and no little philanthropic
effort.  And yet with all this there are many essential elements in the
cooperation of Negroes and whites for work and wealth that are too
readily overlooked or not thoroughly understood.  The average American
can easily conceive of a rich land awaiting development and filled with
black laborers.  To him the Southern problem is simply that of making
efficient workingmen out of this material, by giving them the requisite
technical skill and the help of invested capital.  The problem,
however, is by no means as simple as this, from the obvious fact that
these workingmen have been trained for centuries as slaves.  They
exhibit, therefore, all the advantages and defects of such training;
they are willing and good-natured, but not self-reliant, provident, or
careful.  If now the economic development of the South is to be pushed
to the verge of exploitation, as seems probable, then we have a mass of
workingmen thrown into relentless competition with the workingmen of
the world, but handicapped by a training the very opposite to that of
the modern self-reliant democratic laborer.  What the black laborer
needs is careful personal guidance, group leadership of men with hearts
in their bosoms, to train them to foresight, carefulness, and honesty.
Nor does it require any fine-spun theories of racial differences to
prove the necessity of such group training after the brains of the race
have been knocked out by two hundred and fifty years of assiduous
education in submission, carelessness, and stealing.  After
Emancipation, it was the plain duty of some one to assume this group
leadership and training of the Negro laborer.  I will not stop here to
inquire whose duty it was--whether that of the white ex-master who had
profited by unpaid toil, or the Northern philanthropist whose
persistence brought on the crisis, or the National Government whose
edict freed the bondmen; I will not stop to ask whose duty it was, but
I insist it was the duty of some one to see that these workingmen were
not left alone and unguided, without capital, without land, without
skill, without economic organization, without even the bald protection
of law, order, and decency,--left in a great land, not to settle down
to slow and careful internal development, but destined to be thrown
almost immediately into relentless and sharp competition with the best
of modern workingmen under an economic system where every participant
is fighting for himself, and too often utterly regardless of the rights
or welfare of his neighbor.

For we must never forget that the economic system of the South to-day
which has succeeded the old regime is not the same system as that of
the old industrial North, of England, or of France, with their
trade-unions, their restrictive laws, their written and unwritten
commercial customs, and their long experience.  It is, rather, a copy
of that England of the early nineteenth century, before the factory
acts,--the England that wrung pity from thinkers and fired the wrath of
Carlyle.  The rod of empire that passed from the hands of Southern
gentlemen in 1865, partly by force, partly by their own petulance, has
never returned to them.  Rather it has passed to those men who have
come to take charge of the industrial exploitation of the New
South,--the sons of poor whites fired with a new thirst for wealth and
power, thrifty and avaricious Yankees, and unscrupulous immigrants.
Into the hands of these men the Southern laborers, white and black,
have fallen; and this to their sorrow.  For the laborers as such, there
is in these new captains of industry neither love nor hate, neither
sympathy nor romance; it is a cold question of dollars and dividends.
Under such a system all labor is bound to suffer.  Even the white
laborers are not yet intelligent, thrifty, and well trained enough to
maintain themselves against the powerful inroads of organized capital.
The results among them, even, are long hours of toil, low wages, child
labor, and lack of protection against usury and cheating.  But among
the black laborers all this is aggravated, first, by a race prejudice
which varies from a doubt and distrust among the best element of whites
to a frenzied hatred among the worst; and, secondly, it is aggravated,
as I have said before, by the wretched economic heritage of the
freedmen from slavery.  With this training it is difficult for the
freedman to learn to grasp the opportunities already opened to him, and
the new opportunities are seldom given him, but go by favor to the
whites.

Left by the best elements of the South with little protection or
oversight, he has been made in law and custom the victim of the worst
and most unscrupulous men in each community.  The crop-lien system
which is depopulating the fields of the South is not simply the result
of shiftlessness on the part of Negroes, but is also the result of
cunningly devised laws as to mortgages, liens, and misdemeanors, which
can be made by conscienceless men to entrap and snare the unwary until
escape is impossible, further toil a farce, and protest a crime.  I
have seen, in the Black Belt of Georgia, an ignorant, honest Negro buy
and pay for a farm in installments three separate times, and then in
the face of law and decency the enterprising American who sold it to
him pocketed the money and deed and left the black man landless, to
labor on his own land at thirty cents a day.  I have seen a black
farmer fall in debt to a white storekeeper, and that storekeeper go to
his farm and strip it of every single marketable article,--mules,
ploughs, stored crops, tools, furniture, bedding, clocks,
looking-glass,--and all this without a sheriff or officer, in the face
of the law for homestead exemptions, and without rendering to a single
responsible person any account or reckoning.  And such proceedings can
happen, and will happen, in any community where a class of ignorant
toilers are placed by custom and race-prejudice beyond the pale of
sympathy and race-brotherhood.  So long as the best elements of a
community do not feel in duty bound to protect and train and care for
the weaker members of their group, they leave them to be preyed upon by
these swindlers and rascals.

This unfortunate economic situation does not mean the hindrance of all
advance in the black South, or the absence of a class of black
landlords and mechanics who, in spite of disadvantages, are
accumulating property and making good citizens.  But it does mean that
this class is not nearly so large as a fairer economic system might
easily make it, that those who survive in the competition are
handicapped so as to accomplish much less than they deserve to, and
that, above all, the personnel of the successful class is left to
chance and accident, and not to any intelligent culling or reasonable
methods of selection.  As a remedy for this, there is but one possible
procedure.  We must accept some of the race prejudice in the South as a
fact,--deplorable in its intensity, unfortunate in results, and
dangerous for the future, but nevertheless a hard fact which only time
can efface.  We cannot hope, then, in this generation, or for several
generations, that the mass of the whites can be brought to assume that
close sympathetic and self-sacrificing leadership of the blacks which
their present situation so eloquently demands.  Such leadership, such
social teaching and example, must come from the blacks themselves.  For
some time men doubted as to whether the Negro could develop such
leaders; but to-day no one seriously disputes the capability of
individual Negroes to assimilate the culture and common sense of modern
civilization, and to pass it on, to some extent at least, to their
fellows.  If this is true, then here is the path out of the economic
situation, and here is the imperative demand for trained Negro leaders
of character and intelligence,--men of skill, men of light and leading,
college-bred men, black captains of industry, and missionaries of
culture; men who thoroughly comprehend and know modern civilization,
and can take hold of Negro communities and raise and train them by
force of precept and example, deep sympathy, and the inspiration of
common blood and ideals.  But if such men are to be effective they must
have some power,--they must be backed by the best public opinion of
these communities, and able to wield for their objects and aims such
weapons as the experience of the world has taught are indispensable to
human progress.

Of such weapons the greatest, perhaps, in the modern world is the power
of the ballot; and this brings me to a consideration of the third form
of contact between whites and blacks in the South,--political activity.

In the attitude of the American mind toward Negro suffrage can be
traced with unusual accuracy the prevalent conceptions of government.
In the fifties we were near enough the echoes of the French Revolution
to believe pretty thoroughly in universal suffrage.  We argued, as we
thought then rather logically, that no social class was so good, so
true, and so disinterested as to be trusted wholly with the political
destiny of its neighbors; that in every state the best arbiters of
their own welfare are the persons directly affected; consequently that
it is only by arming every hand with a ballot,--with the right to have
a voice in the policy of the state,--that the greatest good to the
greatest number could be attained.  To be sure, there were objections
to these arguments, but we thought we had answered them tersely and
convincingly; if some one complained of the ignorance of voters, we
answered, "Educate them."  If another complained of their venality, we
replied, "Disfranchise them or put them in jail."  And, finally, to the
men who feared demagogues and the natural perversity of some human
beings we insisted that time and bitter experience would teach the most
hardheaded.  It was at this time that the question of Negro suffrage in
the South was raised.  Here was a defenceless people suddenly made
free.  How were they to be protected from those who did not believe in
their freedom and were determined to thwart it?  Not by force, said the
North; not by government guardianship, said the South; then by the
ballot, the sole and legitimate defence of a free people, said the
Common Sense of the Nation.  No one thought, at the time, that the
ex-slaves could use the ballot intelligently or very effectively; but
they did think that the possession of so great power by a great class
in the nation would compel their fellows to educate this class to its
intelligent use.

Meantime, new thoughts came to the nation: the inevitable period of
moral retrogression and political trickery that ever follows in the
wake of war overtook us.  So flagrant became the political scandals
that reputable men began to leave politics alone, and politics
consequently became disreputable.  Men began to pride themselves on
having nothing to do with their own government, and to agree tacitly
with those who regarded public office as a private perquisite.  In this
state of mind it became easy to wink at the suppression of the Negro
vote in the South, and to advise self-respecting Negroes to leave
politics entirely alone.  The decent and reputable citizens of the
North who neglected their own civic duties grew hilarious over the
exaggerated importance with which the Negro regarded the franchise.
Thus it easily happened that more and more the better class of Negroes
followed the advice from abroad and the pressure from home, and took no
further interest in politics, leaving to the careless and the venal of
their race the exercise of their rights as voters.  The black vote that
still remained was not trained and educated, but further debauched by
open and unblushing bribery, or force and fraud; until the Negro voter
was thoroughly inoculated with the idea that politics was a method of
private gain by disreputable means.

And finally, now, to-day, when we are awakening to the fact that the
perpetuity of republican institutions on this continent depends on the
purification of the ballot, the civic training of voters, and the
raising of voting to the plane of a solemn duty which a patriotic
citizen neglects to his peril and to the peril of his children's
children,--in this day, when we are striving for a renaissance of civic
virtue, what are we going to say to the black voter of the South?  Are
we going to tell him still that politics is a disreputable and useless
form of human activity?  Are we going to induce the best class of
Negroes to take less and less interest in government, and to give up
their right to take such an interest, without a protest?  I am not
saying a word against all legitimate efforts to purge the ballot of
ignorance, pauperism, and crime.  But few have pretended that the
present movement for disfranchisement in the South is for such a
purpose; it has been plainly and frankly declared in nearly every case
that the object of the disfranchising laws is the elimination of the
black man from politics.

Now, is this a minor matter which has no influence on the main question
of the industrial and intellectual development of the Negro?  Can we
establish a mass of black laborers and artisans and landholders in the
South who, by law and public opinion, have absolutely no voice in
shaping the laws under which they live and work?  Can the modern
organization of industry, assuming as it does free democratic
government and the power and ability of the laboring classes to compel
respect for their welfare,--can this system be carried out in the South
when half its laboring force is voiceless in the public councils and
powerless in its own defence?  To-day the black man of the South has
almost nothing to say as to how much he shall be taxed, or how those
taxes shall be expended; as to who shall execute the laws, and how they
shall do it; as to who shall make the laws, and how they shall be made.
It is pitiable that frantic efforts must be made at critical times to
get law-makers in some States even to listen to the respectful
presentation of the black man's side of a current controversy.  Daily
the Negro is coming more and more to look upon law and justice, not as
protecting safeguards, but as sources of humiliation and oppression.
The laws are made by men who have little interest in him; they are
executed by men who have absolutely no motive for treating the black
people with courtesy or consideration; and, finally, the accused
law-breaker is tried, not by his peers, but too often by men who would
rather punish ten innocent Negroes than let one guilty one escape.

I should be the last one to deny the patent weaknesses and shortcomings
of the Negro people; I should be the last to withhold sympathy from the
white South in its efforts to solve its intricate social problems.  I
freely acknowledged that it is possible, and sometimes best, that a
partially undeveloped people should be ruled by the best of their
stronger and better neighbors for their own good, until such time as
they can start and fight the world's battles alone.  I have already
pointed out how sorely in need of such economic and spiritual guidance
the emancipated Negro was, and I am quite willing to admit that if the
representatives of the best white Southern public opinion were the
ruling and guiding powers in the South to-day the conditions indicated
would be fairly well fulfilled.  But the point I have insisted upon and
now emphasize again, is that the best opinion of the South to-day is
not the ruling opinion.  That to leave the Negro helpless and without a
ballot to-day is to leave him not to the guidance of the best, but
rather to the exploitation and debauchment of the worst; that this is
no truer of the South than of the North,--of the North than of Europe:
in any land, in any country under modern free competition, to lay any
class of weak and despised people, be they white, black, or blue, at
the political mercy of their stronger, richer, and more resourceful
fellows, is a temptation which human nature seldom has withstood and
seldom will withstand.

Moreover, the political status of the Negro in the South is closely
connected with the question of Negro crime.  There can be no doubt that
crime among Negroes has sensibly increased in the last thirty years,
and that there has appeared in the slums of great cities a distinct
criminal class among the blacks.  In explaining this unfortunate
development, we must note two things: (1) that the inevitable result of
Emancipation was to increase crime and criminals, and (2) that the
police system of the South was primarily designed to control slaves.
As to the first point, we must not forget that under a strict slave
system there can scarcely be such a thing as crime.  But when these
variously constituted human particles are suddenly thrown broadcast on
the sea of life, some swim, some sink, and some hang suspended, to be
forced up or down by the chance currents of a busy hurrying world.  So
great an economic and social revolution as swept the South in '63 meant
a weeding out among the Negroes of the incompetents and vicious, the
beginning of a differentiation of social grades.  Now a rising group of
people are not lifted bodily from the ground like an inert solid mass,
but rather stretch upward like a living plant with its roots still
clinging in the mould.  The appearance, therefore, of the Negro
criminal was a phenomenon to be awaited; and while it causes anxiety,
it should not occasion surprise.

Here again the hope for the future depended peculiarly on careful and
delicate dealing with these criminals.  Their offences at first were
those of laziness, carelessness, and impulse, rather than of malignity
or ungoverned viciousness.  Such misdemeanors needed discriminating
treatment, firm but reformatory, with no hint of injustice, and full
proof of guilt.  For such dealing with criminals, white or black, the
South had no machinery, no adequate jails or reformatories; its police
system was arranged to deal with blacks alone, and tacitly assumed that
every white man was ipso facto a member of that police.  Thus grew up a
double system of justice, which erred on the white side by undue
leniency and the practical immunity of red-handed criminals, and erred
on the black side by undue severity, injustice, and lack of
discrimination.  For, as I have said, the police system of the South
was originally designed to keep track of all Negroes, not simply of
criminals; and when the Negroes were freed and the whole South was
convinced of the impossibility of free Negro labor, the first and
almost universal device was to use the courts as a means of reenslaving
the blacks.  It was not then a question of crime, but rather one of
color, that settled a man's conviction on almost any charge.  Thus
Negroes came to look upon courts as instruments of injustice and
oppression, and upon those convicted in them as martyrs and victims.

When, now, the real Negro criminal appeared, and instead of petty
stealing and vagrancy we began to have highway robbery, burglary,
murder, and rape, there was a curious effect on both sides the
color-line: the Negroes refused to believe the evidence of white
witnesses or the fairness of white juries, so that the greatest
deterrent to crime, the public opinion of one's own social caste, was
lost, and the criminal was looked upon as crucified rather than hanged.
On the other hand, the whites, used to being careless as to the guilt
or innocence of accused Negroes, were swept in moments of passion
beyond law, reason, and decency.  Such a situation is bound to increase
crime, and has increased it.  To natural viciousness and vagrancy are
being daily added motives of revolt and revenge which stir up all the
latent savagery of both races and make peaceful attention to economic
development often impossible.

But the chief problem in any community cursed with crime is not the
punishment of the criminals, but the preventing of the young from being
trained to crime.  And here again the peculiar conditions of the South
have prevented proper precautions.  I have seen twelve-year-old boys
working in chains on the public streets of Atlanta, directly in front
of the schools, in company with old and hardened criminals; and this
indiscriminate mingling of men and women and children makes the
chain-gangs perfect schools of crime and debauchery.  The struggle for
reformatories, which has gone on in Virginia, Georgia, and other
States, is the one encouraging sign of the awakening of some
communities to the suicidal results of this policy.

It is the public schools, however, which can be made, outside the
homes, the greatest means of training decent self-respecting citizens.
We have been so hotly engaged recently in discussing trade-schools and
the higher education that the pitiable plight of the public-school
system in the South has almost dropped from view.  Of every five
dollars spent for public education in the State of Georgia, the white
schools get four dollars and the Negro one dollar; and even then the
white public-school system, save in the cities, is bad and cries for
reform.  If this is true of the whites, what of the blacks?  I am
becoming more and more convinced, as I look upon the system of
common-school training in the South, that the national government must
soon step in and aid popular education in some way.  To-day it has been
only by the most strenuous efforts on the part of the thinking men of
the South that the Negro's share of the school fund has not been cut
down to a pittance in some half-dozen States; and that movement not
only is not dead, but in many communities is gaining strength.  What in
the name of reason does this nation expect of a people, poorly trained
and hard pressed in severe economic competition, without political
rights, and with ludicrously inadequate common-school facilities?  What
can it expect but crime and listlessness, offset here and there by the
dogged struggles of the fortunate and more determined who are
themselves buoyed by the hope that in due time the country will come to
its senses?

I have thus far sought to make clear the physical, economic, and
political relations of the Negroes and whites in the South, as I have
conceived them, including, for the reasons set forth, crime and
education.  But after all that has been said on these more tangible
matters of human contact, there still remains a part essential to a
proper description of the South which it is difficult to describe or
fix in terms easily understood by strangers.  It is, in fine, the
atmosphere of the land, the thought and feeling, the thousand and one
little actions which go to make up life.  In any community or nation it
is these little things which are most elusive to the grasp and yet most
essential to any clear conception of the group life taken as a whole.
What is thus true of all communities is peculiarly true of the South,
where, outside of written history and outside of printed law, there has
been going on for a generation as deep a storm and stress of human
souls, as intense a ferment of feeling, as intricate a writhing of
spirit, as ever a people experienced.  Within and without the sombre
veil of color vast social forces have been at work,--efforts for human
betterment, movements toward disintegration and despair, tragedies and
comedies in social and economic life, and a swaying and lifting and
sinking of human hearts which have made this land a land of mingled
sorrow and joy, of change and excitement and unrest.

The centre of this spiritual turmoil has ever been the millions of
black freedmen and their sons, whose destiny is so fatefully bound up
with that of the nation.  And yet the casual observer visiting the
South sees at first little of this.  He notes the growing frequency of
dark faces as he rides along,--but otherwise the days slip lazily on,
the sun shines, and this little world seems as happy and contented as
other worlds he has visited.  Indeed, on the question of questions--the
Negro problem--he hears so little that there almost seems to be a
conspiracy of silence; the morning papers seldom mention it, and then
usually in a far-fetched academic way, and indeed almost every one
seems to forget and ignore the darker half of the land, until the
astonished visitor is inclined to ask if after all there IS any problem
here.  But if he lingers long enough there comes the awakening: perhaps
in a sudden whirl of passion which leaves him gasping at its bitter
intensity; more likely in a gradually dawning sense of things he had
not at first noticed.  Slowly but surely his eyes begin to catch the
shadows of the color-line: here he meets crowds of Negroes and whites;
then he is suddenly aware that he cannot discover a single dark face;
or again at the close of a day's wandering he may find himself in some
strange assembly, where all faces are tinged brown or black, and where
he has the vague, uncomfortable feeling of the stranger.  He realizes
at last that silently, resistlessly, the world about flows by him in
two great streams: they ripple on in the same sunshine, they approach
and mingle their waters in seeming carelessness,--then they divide and
flow wide apart.  It is done quietly; no mistakes are made, or if one
occurs, the swift arm of the law and of public opinion swings down for
a moment, as when the other day a black man and a white woman were
arrested for talking together on Whitehall Street in Atlanta.

Now if one notices carefully one will see that between these two
worlds, despite much physical contact and daily intermingling, there is
almost no community of intellectual life or point of transference where
the thoughts and feelings of one race can come into direct contact and
sympathy with the thoughts and feelings of the other.  Before and
directly after the war, when all the best of the Negroes were domestic
servants in the best of the white families, there were bonds of
intimacy, affection, and sometimes blood relationship, between the
races.  They lived in the same home, shared in the family life, often
attended the same church, and talked and conversed with each other.
But the increasing civilization of the Negro since then has naturally
meant the development of higher classes: there are increasing numbers
of ministers, teachers, physicians, merchants, mechanics, and
independent farmers, who by nature and training are the aristocracy and
leaders of the blacks.  Between them, however, and the best element of
the whites, there is little or no intellectual commerce.  They go to
separate churches, they live in separate sections, they are strictly
separated in all public gatherings, they travel separately, and they
are beginning to read different papers and books.  To most libraries,
lectures, concerts, and museums, Negroes are either not admitted at
all, or on terms peculiarly galling to the pride of the very classes
who might otherwise be attracted.  The daily paper chronicles the
doings of the black world from afar with no great regard for accuracy;
and so on, throughout the category of means for intellectual
communication,--schools, conferences, efforts for social betterment,
and the like,--it is usually true that the very representatives of the
two races, who for mutual benefit and the welfare of the land ought to
be in complete understanding and sympathy, are so far strangers that
one side thinks all whites are narrow and prejudiced, and the other
thinks educated Negroes dangerous and insolent.  Moreover, in a land
where the tyranny of public opinion and the intolerance of criticism is
for obvious historical reasons so strong as in the South, such a
situation is extremely difficult to correct.  The white man, as well as
the Negro, is bound and barred by the color-line, and many a scheme of
friendliness and philanthropy, of broad-minded sympathy and generous
fellowship between the two has dropped still-born because some busybody
has forced the color-question to the front and brought the tremendous
force of unwritten law against the innovators.

It is hardly necessary for me to add very much in regard to the social
contact between the races.  Nothing has come to replace that finer
sympathy and love between some masters and house servants which the
radical and more uncompromising drawing of the color-line in recent
years has caused almost completely to disappear.  In a world where it
means so much to take a man by the hand and sit beside him, to look
frankly into his eyes and feel his heart beating with red blood; in a
world where a social cigar or a cup of tea together means more than
legislative halls and magazine articles and speeches,--one can imagine
the consequences of the almost utter absence of such social amenities
between estranged races, whose separation extends even to parks and
streetcars.

Here there can be none of that social going down to the people,--the
opening of heart and hand of the best to the worst, in generous
acknowledgment of a common humanity and a common destiny.  On the other
hand, in matters of simple almsgiving, where there can be no question
of social contact, and in the succor of the aged and sick, the South,
as if stirred by a feeling of its unfortunate limitations, is generous
to a fault.  The black beggar is never turned away without a good deal
more than a crust, and a call for help for the unfortunate meets quick
response.  I remember, one cold winter, in Atlanta, when I refrained
from contributing to a public relief fund lest Negroes should be
discriminated against, I afterward inquired of a friend: "Were any
black people receiving aid?"  "Why," said he, "they were all black."

And yet this does not touch the kernel of the problem.  Human
advancement is not a mere question of almsgiving, but rather of
sympathy and cooperation among classes who would scorn charity.  And
here is a land where, in the higher walks of life, in all the higher
striving for the good and noble and true, the color-line comes to
separate natural friends and coworkers; while at the bottom of the
social group, in the saloon, the gambling-hell, and the brothel, that
same line wavers and disappears.

I have sought to paint an average picture of real relations between the
sons of master and man in the South.  I have not glossed over matters
for policy's sake, for I fear we have already gone too far in that sort
of thing.  On the other hand, I have sincerely sought to let no unfair
exaggerations creep in.  I do not doubt that in some Southern
communities conditions are better than those I have indicated; while I
am no less certain that in other communities they are far worse.

Nor does the paradox and danger of this situation fail to interest and
perplex the best conscience of the South.  Deeply religious and
intensely democratic as are the mass of the whites, they feel acutely
the false position in which the Negro problems place them.  Such an
essentially honest-hearted and generous people cannot cite the
caste-levelling precepts of Christianity, or believe in equality of
opportunity for all men, without coming to feel more and more with each
generation that the present drawing of the color-line is a flat
contradiction to their beliefs and professions.  But just as often as
they come to this point, the present social condition of the Negro
stands as a menace and a portent before even the most open-minded: if
there were nothing to charge against the Negro but his blackness or
other physical peculiarities, they argue, the problem would be
comparatively simple; but what can we say to his ignorance,
shiftlessness, poverty, and crime?  can a self-respecting group hold
anything but the least possible fellowship with such persons and
survive? and shall we let a mawkish sentiment sweep away the culture of
our fathers or the hope of our children?  The argument so put is of
great strength, but it is not a whit stronger than the argument of
thinking Negroes: granted, they reply, that the condition of our masses
is bad; there is certainly on the one hand adequate historical cause
for this, and unmistakable evidence that no small number have, in spite
of tremendous disadvantages, risen to the level of American
civilization.  And when, by proscription and prejudice, these same
Negroes are classed with and treated like the lowest of their people,
simply because they are Negroes, such a policy not only discourages
thrift and intelligence among black men, but puts a direct premium on
the very things you complain of,--inefficiency and crime.  Draw lines
of crime, of incompetency, of vice, as tightly and uncompromisingly as
you will, for these things must be proscribed; but a color-line not
only does not accomplish this purpose, but thwarts it.

In the face of two such arguments, the future of the South depends on
the ability of the representatives of these opposing views to see and
appreciate and sympathize with each other's position,--for the Negro to
realize more deeply than he does at present the need of uplifting the
masses of his people, for the white people to realize more vividly than
they have yet done the deadening and disastrous effect of a
color-prejudice that classes Phillis Wheatley and Sam Hose in the same
despised class.

It is not enough for the Negroes to declare that color-prejudice is the
sole cause of their social condition, nor for the white South to reply
that their social condition is the main cause of prejudice.  They both
act as reciprocal cause and effect, and a change in neither alone will
bring the desired effect.  Both must change, or neither can improve to
any great extent.  The Negro cannot stand the present reactionary
tendencies and unreasoning drawing of the color-line indefinitely
without discouragement and retrogression.  And the condition of the
Negro is ever the excuse for further discrimination.  Only by a union
of intelligence and sympathy across the color-line in this critical
period of the Republic shall justice and right triumph,

  "That mind and soul according well,
  May make one music as before,
            But vaster."




X

Of the Faith of the Fathers

  Dim face of Beauty haunting all the world,
    Fair face of Beauty all too fair to see,
  Where the lost stars adown the heavens are hurled,--

    There, there alone for thee

    May white peace be.

  Beauty, sad face of Beauty, Mystery, Wonder,
    What are these dreams to foolish babbling men
  Who cry with little noises 'neath the thunder

    Of Ages ground to sand,

    To a little sand.

  FIONA MACLEOD.


It was out in the country, far from home, far from my foster home, on a
dark Sunday night.  The road wandered from our rambling log-house up
the stony bed of a creek, past wheat and corn, until we could hear
dimly across the fields a rhythmic cadence of song,--soft, thrilling,
powerful, that swelled and died sorrowfully in our ears.  I was a
country schoolteacher then, fresh from the East, and had never seen a
Southern Negro revival.  To be sure, we in Berkshire were not perhaps
as stiff and formal as they in Suffolk of olden time; yet we were very
quiet and subdued, and I know not what would have happened those clear
Sabbath mornings had some one punctuated the sermon with a wild scream,
or interrupted the long prayer with a loud Amen!  And so most striking
to me, as I approached the village and the little plain church perched
aloft, was the air of intense excitement that possessed that mass of
black folk.  A sort of suppressed terror hung in the air and seemed to
seize us,--a pythian madness, a demoniac possession, that lent terrible
reality to song and word.  The black and massive form of the preacher
swayed and quivered as the words crowded to his lips and flew at us in
singular eloquence.  The people moaned and fluttered, and then the
gaunt-cheeked brown woman beside me suddenly leaped straight into the
air and shrieked like a lost soul, while round about came wail and
groan and outcry, and a scene of human passion such as I had never
conceived before.

Those who have not thus witnessed the frenzy of a Negro revival in the
untouched backwoods of the South can but dimly realize the religious
feeling of the slave; as described, such scenes appear grotesque and
funny, but as seen they are awful.  Three things characterized this
religion of the slave,--the Preacher, the Music, and the Frenzy.  The
Preacher is the most unique personality developed by the Negro on
American soil.  A leader, a politician, an orator, a "boss," an
intriguer, an idealist,--all these he is, and ever, too, the centre of
a group of men, now twenty, now a thousand in number.  The combination
of a certain adroitness with deep-seated earnestness, of tact with
consummate ability, gave him his preeminence, and helps him maintain
it.  The type, of course, varies according to time and place, from the
West Indies in the sixteenth century to New England in the nineteenth,
and from the Mississippi bottoms to cities like New Orleans or New York.

The Music of Negro religion is that plaintive rhythmic melody, with its
touching minor cadences, which, despite caricature and defilement,
still remains the most original and beautiful expression of human life
and longing yet born on American soil.  Sprung from the African
forests, where its counterpart can still be heard, it was adapted,
changed, and intensified by the tragic soul-life of the slave, until,
under the stress of law and whip, it became the one true expression of
a people's sorrow, despair, and hope.

Finally the Frenzy of "Shouting," when the Spirit of the Lord passed
by, and, seizing the devotee, made him mad with supernatural joy, was
the last essential of Negro religion and the one more devoutly believed
in than all the rest.  It varied in expression from the silent rapt
countenance or the low murmur and moan to the mad abandon of physical
fervor,--the stamping, shrieking, and shouting, the rushing to and fro
and wild waving of arms, the weeping and laughing, the vision and the
trance.  All this is nothing new in the world, but old as religion, as
Delphi and Endor.  And so firm a hold did it have on the Negro, that
many generations firmly believed that without this visible
manifestation of the God there could be no true communion with the
Invisible.

These were the characteristics of Negro religious life as developed up
to the time of Emancipation.  Since under the peculiar circumstances of
the black man's environment they were the one expression of his higher
life, they are of deep interest to the student of his development, both
socially and psychologically.  Numerous are the attractive lines of
inquiry that here group themselves.  What did slavery mean to the
African savage?  What was his attitude toward the World and Life?  What
seemed to him good and evil,--God and Devil?  Whither went his longings
and strivings, and wherefore were his heart-burnings and
disappointments?  Answers to such questions can come only from a study
of Negro religion as a development, through its gradual changes from
the heathenism of the Gold Coast to the institutional Negro church of
Chicago.

Moreover, the religious growth of millions of men, even though they be
slaves, cannot be without potent influence upon their contemporaries.
The Methodists and Baptists of America owe much of their condition to
the silent but potent influence of their millions of Negro converts.
Especially is this noticeable in the South, where theology and
religious philosophy are on this account a long way behind the North,
and where the religion of the poor whites is a plain copy of Negro
thought and methods.  The mass of "gospel" hymns which has swept
through American churches and well-nigh ruined our sense of song
consists largely of debased imitations of Negro melodies made by ears
that caught the jingle but not the music, the body but not the soul, of
the Jubilee songs.  It is thus clear that the study of Negro religion
is not only a vital part of the history of the Negro in America, but no
uninteresting part of American history.

The Negro church of to-day is the social centre of Negro life in the
United States, and the most characteristic expression of African
character.  Take a typical church in a small Virginia town: it is the
"First Baptist"--a roomy brick edifice seating five hundred or more
persons, tastefully finished in Georgia pine, with a carpet, a small
organ, and stained-glass windows.  Underneath is a large assembly room
with benches.  This building is the central club-house of a community
of a thousand or more Negroes.  Various organizations meet here,--the
church proper, the Sunday-school, two or three insurance societies,
women's societies, secret societies, and mass meetings of various
kinds.  Entertainments, suppers, and lectures are held beside the five
or six regular weekly religious services.  Considerable sums of money
are collected and expended here, employment is found for the idle,
strangers are introduced, news is disseminated and charity distributed.
At the same time this social, intellectual, and economic centre is a
religious centre of great power.  Depravity, Sin, Redemption, Heaven,
Hell, and Damnation are preached twice a Sunday after the crops are
laid by; and few indeed of the community have the hardihood to
withstand conversion.  Back of this more formal religion, the Church
often stands as a real conserver of morals, a strengthener of family
life, and the final authority on what is Good and Right.

Thus one can see in the Negro church to-day, reproduced in microcosm,
all the great world from which the Negro is cut off by color-prejudice
and social condition.  In the great city churches the same tendency is
noticeable and in many respects emphasized.  A great church like the
Bethel of Philadelphia has over eleven hundred members, an edifice
seating fifteen hundred persons and valued at one hundred thousand
dollars, an annual budget of five thousand dollars, and a government
consisting of a pastor with several assisting local preachers, an
executive and legislative board, financial boards and tax collectors;
general church meetings for making laws; sub-divided groups led by
class leaders, a company of militia, and twenty-four auxiliary
societies.  The activity of a church like this is immense and
far-reaching, and the bishops who preside over these organizations
throughout the land are among the most powerful Negro rulers in the
world.

Such churches are really governments of men, and consequently a little
investigation reveals the curious fact that, in the South, at least,
practically every American Negro is a church member.  Some, to be sure,
are not regularly enrolled, and a few do not habitually attend
services; but, practically, a proscribed people must have a social
centre, and that centre for this people is the Negro church.  The
census of 1890 showed nearly twenty-four thousand Negro churches in the
country, with a total enrolled membership of over two and a half
millions, or ten actual church members to every twenty-eight persons,
and in some Southern States one in every two persons.  Besides these
there is the large number who, while not enrolled as members, attend
and take part in many of the activities of the church.  There is an
organized Negro church for every sixty black families in the nation,
and in some States for every forty families, owning, on an average, a
thousand dollars' worth of property each, or nearly twenty-six million
dollars in all.

Such, then, is the large development of the Negro church since
Emancipation.  The question now is, What have been the successive steps
of this social history and what are the present tendencies?  First, we
must realize that no such institution as the Negro church could rear
itself without definite historical foundations.  These foundations we
can find if we remember that the social history of the Negro did not
start in America.  He was brought from a definite social
environment,--the polygamous clan life under the headship of the chief
and the potent influence of the priest.  His religion was
nature-worship, with profound belief in invisible surrounding
influences, good and bad, and his worship was through incantation and
sacrifice.  The first rude change in this life was the slave ship and
the West Indian sugar-fields.  The plantation organization replaced the
clan and tribe, and the white master replaced the chief with far
greater and more despotic powers.  Forced and long-continued toil
became the rule of life, the old ties of blood relationship and kinship
disappeared, and instead of the family appeared a new polygamy and
polyandry, which, in some cases, almost reached promiscuity.  It was a
terrific social revolution, and yet some traces were retained of the
former group life, and the chief remaining institution was the Priest
or Medicine-man.  He early appeared on the plantation and found his
function as the healer of the sick, the interpreter of the Unknown, the
comforter of the sorrowing, the supernatural avenger of wrong, and the
one who rudely but picturesquely expressed the longing, disappointment,
and resentment of a stolen and oppressed people.  Thus, as bard,
physician, judge, and priest, within the narrow limits allowed by the
slave system, rose the Negro preacher, and under him the first church
was not at first by any means Christian nor definitely organized;
rather it was an adaptation and mingling of heathen rites among the
members of each plantation, and roughly designated as Voodooism.
Association with the masters, missionary effort and motives of
expediency gave these rites an early veneer of Christianity, and after
the lapse of many generations the Negro church became Christian.

Two characteristic things must be noticed in regard to the church.
First, it became almost entirely Baptist and Methodist in faith;
secondly, as a social institution it antedated by many decades the
monogamic Negro home.  From the very circumstances of its beginning,
the church was confined to the plantation, and consisted primarily of a
series of disconnected units; although, later on, some freedom of
movement was allowed, still this geographical limitation was always
important and was one cause of the spread of the decentralized and
democratic Baptist faith among the slaves.  At the same time, the
visible rite of baptism appealed strongly to their mystic temperament.
To-day the Baptist Church is still largest in membership among Negroes,
and has a million and a half communicants.  Next in popularity came the
churches organized in connection with the white neighboring churches,
chiefly Baptist and Methodist, with a few Episcopalian and others.  The
Methodists still form the second greatest denomination, with nearly a
million members.  The faith of these two leading denominations was more
suited to the slave church from the prominence they gave to religious
feeling and fervor.  The Negro membership in other denominations has
always been small and relatively unimportant, although the
Episcopalians and Presbyterians are gaining among the more intelligent
classes to-day, and the Catholic Church is making headway in certain
sections.  After Emancipation, and still earlier in the North, the
Negro churches largely severed such affiliations as they had had with
the white churches, either by choice or by compulsion.  The Baptist
churches became independent, but the Methodists were compelled early to
unite for purposes of episcopal government.  This gave rise to the
great African Methodist Church, the greatest Negro organization in the
world, to the Zion Church and the Colored Methodist, and to the black
conferences and churches in this and other denominations.

The second fact noted, namely, that the Negro church antedates the
Negro home, leads to an explanation of much that is paradoxical in this
communistic institution and in the morals of its members.  But
especially it leads us to regard this institution as peculiarly the
expression of the inner ethical life of a people in a sense seldom true
elsewhere.  Let us turn, then, from the outer physical development of
the church to the more important inner ethical life of the people who
compose it.  The Negro has already been pointed out many times as a
religious animal,--a being of that deep emotional nature which turns
instinctively toward the supernatural.  Endowed with a rich tropical
imagination and a keen, delicate appreciation of Nature, the
transplanted African lived in a world animate with gods and devils,
elves and witches; full of strange influences,--of Good to be implored,
of Evil to be propitiated.  Slavery, then, was to him the dark triumph
of Evil over him.  All the hateful powers of the Under-world were
striving against him, and a spirit of revolt and revenge filled his
heart.  He called up all the resources of heathenism to aid,--exorcism
and witch-craft, the mysterious Obi worship with its barbarious rites,
spells, and blood-sacrifice even, now and then, of human victims.
Weird midnight orgies and mystic conjurations were invoked, the
witch-woman and the voodoo-priest became the centre of Negro group
life, and that vein of vague superstition which characterizes the
unlettered Negro even to-day was deepened and strengthened.

In spite, however, of such success as that of the fierce Maroons, the
Danish blacks, and others, the spirit of revolt gradually died away
under the untiring energy and superior strength of the slave masters.
By the middle of the eighteenth century the black slave had sunk, with
hushed murmurs, to his place at the bottom of a new economic system,
and was unconsciously ripe for a new philosophy of life.  Nothing
suited his condition then better than the doctrines of passive
submission embodied in the newly learned Christianity.  Slave masters
early realized this, and cheerfully aided religious propaganda within
certain bounds.  The long system of repression and degradation of the
Negro tended to emphasize the elements of his character which made him
a valuable chattel: courtesy became humility, moral strength
degenerated into submission, and the exquisite native appreciation of
the beautiful became an infinite capacity for dumb suffering.  The
Negro, losing the joy of this world, eagerly seized upon the offered
conceptions of the next; the avenging Spirit of the Lord enjoining
patience in this world, under sorrow and tribulation until the Great
Day when He should lead His dark children home,--this became his
comforting dream.  His preacher repeated the prophecy, and his bards
sang,--

  "Children, we all shall be free
  When the Lord shall appear!"


This deep religious fatalism, painted so beautifully in "Uncle Tom,"
came soon to breed, as all fatalistic faiths will, the sensualist side
by side with the martyr.  Under the lax moral life of the plantation,
where marriage was a farce, laziness a virtue, and property a theft, a
religion of resignation and submission degenerated easily, in less
strenuous minds, into a philosophy of indulgence and crime.  Many of
the worst characteristics of the Negro masses of to-day had their seed
in this period of the slave's ethical growth.  Here it was that the
Home was ruined under the very shadow of the Church, white and black;
here habits of shiftlessness took root, and sullen hopelessness
replaced hopeful strife.

With the beginning of the abolition movement and the gradual growth of
a class of free Negroes came a change.  We often neglect the influence
of the freedman before the war, because of the paucity of his numbers
and the small weight he had in the history of the nation.  But we must
not forget that his chief influence was internal,--was exerted on the
black world; and that there he was the ethical and social leader.
Huddled as he was in a few centres like Philadelphia, New York, and New
Orleans, the masses of the freedmen sank into poverty and listlessness;
but not all of them.  The free Negro leader early arose and his chief
characteristic was intense earnestness and deep feeling on the slavery
question.  Freedom became to him a real thing and not a dream.  His
religion became darker and more intense, and into his ethics crept a
note of revenge, into his songs a day of reckoning close at hand.  The
"Coming of the Lord" swept this side of Death, and came to be a thing
to be hoped for in this day.  Through fugitive slaves and irrepressible
discussion this desire for freedom seized the black millions still in
bondage, and became their one ideal of life.  The black bards caught
new notes, and sometimes even dared to sing,--

  "O Freedom, O Freedom, O Freedom over me!
  Before I'll be a slave
  I'll be buried in my grave,
  And go home to my Lord
  And be free."


For fifty years Negro religion thus transformed itself and identified
itself with the dream of Abolition, until that which was a radical fad
in the white North and an anarchistic plot in the white South had
become a religion to the black world.  Thus, when Emancipation finally
came, it seemed to the freedman a literal Coming of the Lord.  His
fervid imagination was stirred as never before, by the tramp of armies,
the blood and dust of battle, and the wail and whirl of social
upheaval.  He stood dumb and motionless before the whirlwind: what had
he to do with it?  Was it not the Lord's doing, and marvellous in his
eyes?  Joyed and bewildered with what came, he stood awaiting new
wonders till the inevitable Age of Reaction swept over the nation and
brought the crisis of to-day.

It is difficult to explain clearly the present critical stage of Negro
religion.  First, we must remember that living as the blacks do in
close contact with a great modern nation, and sharing, although
imperfectly, the soul-life of that nation, they must necessarily be
affected more or less directly by all the religious and ethical forces
that are to-day moving the United States.  These questions and
movements are, however, overshadowed and dwarfed by the (to them)
all-important question of their civil, political, and economic status.
They must perpetually discuss the "Negro Problem,"--must live, move,
and have their being in it, and interpret all else in its light or
darkness.  With this come, too, peculiar problems of their inner
life,--of the status of women, the maintenance of Home, the training of
children, the accumulation of wealth, and the prevention of crime.  All
this must mean a time of intense ethical ferment, of religious
heart-searching and intellectual unrest.  From the double life every
American Negro must live, as a Negro and as an American, as swept on by
the current of the nineteenth while yet struggling in the eddies of the
fifteenth century,--from this must arise a painful self-consciousness,
an almost morbid sense of personality and a moral hesitancy which is
fatal to self-confidence.  The worlds within and without the Veil of
Color are changing, and changing rapidly, but not at the same rate, not
in the same way; and this must produce a peculiar wrenching of the
soul, a peculiar sense of doubt and bewilderment.  Such a double life,
with double thoughts, double duties, and double social classes, must
give rise to double words and double ideals, and tempt the mind to
pretence or revolt, to hypocrisy or radicalism.

In some such doubtful words and phrases can one perhaps most clearly
picture the peculiar ethical paradox that faces the Negro of to-day and
is tingeing and changing his religious life.  Feeling that his rights
and his dearest ideals are being trampled upon, that the public
conscience is ever more deaf to his righteous appeal, and that all the
reactionary forces of prejudice, greed, and revenge are daily gaining
new strength and fresh allies, the Negro faces no enviable dilemma.
Conscious of his impotence, and pessimistic, he often becomes bitter
and vindictive; and his religion, instead of a worship, is a complaint
and a curse, a wail rather than a hope, a sneer rather than a faith.
On the other hand, another type of mind, shrewder and keener and more
tortuous too, sees in the very strength of the anti-Negro movement its
patent weaknesses, and with Jesuitic casuistry is deterred by no
ethical considerations in the endeavor to turn this weakness to the
black man's strength.  Thus we have two great and hardly reconcilable
streams of thought and ethical strivings; the danger of the one lies in
anarchy, that of the other in hypocrisy.  The one type of Negro stands
almost ready to curse God and die, and the other is too often found a
traitor to right and a coward before force; the one is wedded to ideals
remote, whimsical, perhaps impossible of realization; the other forgets
that life is more than meat and the body more than raiment.  But, after
all, is not this simply the writhing of the age translated into
black,--the triumph of the Lie which today, with its false culture,
faces the hideousness of the anarchist assassin?

To-day the two groups of Negroes, the one in the North, the other in
the South, represent these divergent ethical tendencies, the first
tending toward radicalism, the other toward hypocritical compromise.
It is no idle regret with which the white South mourns the loss of the
old-time Negro,--the frank, honest, simple old servant who stood for
the earlier religious age of submission and humility.  With all his
laziness and lack of many elements of true manhood, he was at least
open-hearted, faithful, and sincere.  To-day he is gone, but who is to
blame for his going?  Is it not those very persons who mourn for him?
Is it not the tendency, born of Reconstruction and Reaction, to found a
society on lawlessness and deception, to tamper with the moral fibre of
a naturally honest and straightforward people until the whites threaten
to become ungovernable tyrants and the blacks criminals and hypocrites?
Deception is the natural defence of the weak against the strong, and
the South used it for many years against its conquerors; to-day it must
be prepared to see its black proletariat turn that same two-edged
weapon against itself.  And how natural this is!  The death of Denmark
Vesey and Nat Turner proved long since to the Negro the present
hopelessness of physical defence.  Political defence is becoming less
and less available, and economic defence is still only partially
effective.  But there is a patent defence at hand,--the defence of
deception and flattery, of cajoling and lying.  It is the same defence
which peasants of the Middle Age used and which left its stamp on their
character for centuries.  To-day the young Negro of the South who would
succeed cannot be frank and outspoken, honest and self-assertive, but
rather he is daily tempted to be silent and wary, politic and sly; he
must flatter and be pleasant, endure petty insults with a smile, shut
his eyes to wrong; in too many cases he sees positive personal
advantage in deception and lying.  His real thoughts, his real
aspirations, must be guarded in whispers; he must not criticise, he
must not complain.  Patience, humility, and adroitness must, in these
growing black youth, replace impulse, manliness, and courage.  With
this sacrifice there is an economic opening, and perhaps peace and some
prosperity.  Without this there is riot, migration, or crime.  Nor is
this situation peculiar to the Southern United States, is it not rather
the only method by which undeveloped races have gained the right to
share modern culture?  The price of culture is a Lie.

On the other hand, in the North the tendency is to emphasize the
radicalism of the Negro.  Driven from his birthright in the South by a
situation at which every fibre of his more outspoken and assertive
nature revolts, he finds himself in a land where he can scarcely earn a
decent living amid the harsh competition and the color discrimination.
At the same time, through schools and periodicals, discussions and
lectures, he is intellectually quickened and awakened.  The soul, long
pent up and dwarfed, suddenly expands in new-found freedom.  What
wonder that every tendency is to excess,--radical complaint, radical
remedies, bitter denunciation or angry silence.  Some sink, some rise.
The criminal and the sensualist leave the church for the gambling-hell
and the brothel, and fill the slums of Chicago and Baltimore; the
better classes segregate themselves from the group-life of both white
and black, and form an aristocracy, cultured but pessimistic, whose
bitter criticism stings while it points out no way of escape.  They
despise the submission and subserviency of the Southern Negroes, but
offer no other means by which a poor and oppressed minority can exist
side by side with its masters.  Feeling deeply and keenly the
tendencies and opportunities of the age in which they live, their souls
are bitter at the fate which drops the Veil between; and the very fact
that this bitterness is natural and justifiable only serves to
intensify it and make it more maddening.

Between the two extreme types of ethical attitude which I have thus
sought to make clear wavers the mass of the millions of Negroes, North
and South; and their religious life and activity partake of this social
conflict within their ranks.  Their churches are differentiating,--now
into groups of cold, fashionable devotees, in no way distinguishable
from similar white groups save in color of skin; now into large social
and business institutions catering to the desire for information and
amusement of their members, warily avoiding unpleasant questions both
within and without the black world, and preaching in effect if not in
word: Dum vivimus, vivamus.

But back of this still broods silently the deep religious feeling of
the real Negro heart, the stirring, unguided might of powerful human
souls who have lost the guiding star of the past and seek in the great
night a new religious ideal.  Some day the Awakening will come, when
the pent-up vigor of ten million souls shall sweep irresistibly toward
the Goal, out of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, where all that
makes life worth living--Liberty, Justice, and Right--is marked "For
White People Only."




XI

Of the Passing of the First-Born

  O sister, sister, thy first-begotten,
  The hands that cling and the feet that follow,
  The voice of the child's blood crying yet,
  WHO HATH REMEMBERED ME?  WHO HATH FORGOTTEN?
  Thou hast forgotten, O summer swallow,
  But the world shall end when I forget.

  SWINBURNE.


"Unto you a child is born," sang the bit of yellow paper that fluttered
into my room one brown October morning.  Then the fear of fatherhood
mingled wildly with the joy of creation; I wondered how it looked and
how it felt--what were its eyes, and how its hair curled and crumpled
itself.  And I thought in awe of her,--she who had slept with Death to
tear a man-child from underneath her heart, while I was unconsciously
wandering.  I fled to my wife and child, repeating the while to myself
half wonderingly, "Wife and child?  Wife and child?"--fled fast and
faster than boat and steam-car, and yet must ever impatiently await
them; away from the hard-voiced city, away from the flickering sea into
my own Berkshire Hills that sit all sadly guarding the gates of
Massachusetts.

Up the stairs I ran to the wan mother and whimpering babe, to the
sanctuary on whose altar a life at my bidding had offered itself to win
a life, and won.  What is this tiny formless thing, this newborn wail
from an unknown world,--all head and voice?  I handle it curiously, and
watch perplexed its winking, breathing, and sneezing.  I did not love
it then; it seemed a ludicrous thing to love; but her I loved, my
girl-mother, she whom now I saw unfolding like the glory of the
morning--the transfigured woman.  Through her I came to love the wee
thing, as it grew strong; as its little soul unfolded itself in twitter
and cry and half-formed word, and as its eyes caught the gleam and
flash of life.  How beautiful he was, with his olive-tinted flesh and
dark gold ringlets, his eyes of mingled blue and brown, his perfect
little limbs, and the soft voluptuous roll which the blood of Africa
had moulded into his features!  I held him in my arms, after we had
sped far away from our Southern home,--held him, and glanced at the hot
red soil of Georgia and the breathless city of a hundred hills, and
felt a vague unrest.  Why was his hair tinted with gold?  An evil omen
was golden hair in my life.  Why had not the brown of his eyes crushed
out and killed the blue?--for brown were his father's eyes, and his
father's father's.  And thus in the Land of the Color-line I saw, as it
fell across my baby, the shadow of the Veil.

Within the Veil was he born, said I; and there within shall he live,--a
Negro and a Negro's son.  Holding in that little head--ah,
bitterly!--he unbowed pride of a hunted race, clinging with that tiny
dimpled hand--ah, wearily!--to a hope not hopeless but unhopeful, and
seeing with those bright wondering eyes that peer into my soul a land
whose freedom is to us a mockery and whose liberty a lie.  I saw the
shadow of the Veil as it passed over my baby, I saw the cold city
towering above the blood-red land.  I held my face beside his little
cheek, showed him the star-children and the twinkling lights as they
began to flash, and stilled with an even-song the unvoiced terror of my
life.

So sturdy and masterful he grew, so filled with bubbling life, so
tremulous with the unspoken wisdom of a life but eighteen months
distant from the All-life,--we were not far from worshipping this
revelation of the divine, my wife and I. Her own life builded and
moulded itself upon the child; he tinged her every dream and idealized
her every effort.  No hands but hers must touch and garnish those
little limbs; no dress or frill must touch them that had not wearied
her fingers; no voice but hers could coax him off to Dreamland, and she
and he together spoke some soft and unknown tongue and in it held
communion.  I too mused above his little white bed; saw the strength of
my own arm stretched onward through the ages through the newer strength
of his; saw the dream of my black fathers stagger a step onward in the
wild phantasm of the world; heard in his baby voice the voice of the
Prophet that was to rise within the Veil.

And so we dreamed and loved and planned by fall and winter, and the
full flush of the long Southern spring, till the hot winds rolled from
the fetid Gulf, till the roses shivered and the still stern sun
quivered its awful light over the hills of Atlanta.  And then one night
the little feet pattered wearily to the wee white bed, and the tiny
hands trembled; and a warm flushed face tossed on the pillow, and we
knew baby was sick.  Ten days he lay there,--a swift week and three
endless days, wasting, wasting away.  Cheerily the mother nursed him
the first days, and laughed into the little eyes that smiled again.
Tenderly then she hovered round him, till the smile fled away and Fear
crouched beside the little bed.

Then the day ended not, and night was a dreamless terror, and joy and
sleep slipped away.  I hear now that Voice at midnight calling me from
dull and dreamless trance,--crying, "The Shadow of Death!  The Shadow
of Death!"  Out into the starlight I crept, to rouse the gray
physician,--the Shadow of Death, the Shadow of Death.  The hours
trembled on; the night listened; the ghastly dawn glided like a tired
thing across the lamplight.  Then we two alone looked upon the child as
he turned toward us with great eyes, and stretched his stringlike
hands,--the Shadow of Death!  And we spoke no word, and turned away.

He died at eventide, when the sun lay like a brooding sorrow above the
western hills, veiling its face; when the winds spoke not, and the
trees, the great green trees he loved, stood motionless.  I saw his
breath beat quicker and quicker, pause, and then his little soul leapt
like a star that travels in the night and left a world of darkness in
its train.  The day changed not; the same tall trees peeped in at the
windows, the same green grass glinted in the setting sun.  Only in the
chamber of death writhed the world's most piteous thing--a childless
mother.

I shirk not.  I long for work.  I pant for a life full of striving.  I
am no coward, to shrink before the rugged rush of the storm, nor even
quail before the awful shadow of the Veil.  But hearken, O Death!  Is
not this my life hard enough,--is not that dull land that stretches its
sneering web about me cold enough,--is not all the world beyond these
four little walls pitiless enough, but that thou must needs enter
here,--thou, O Death?  About my head the thundering storm beat like a
heartless voice, and the crazy forest pulsed with the curses of the
weak; but what cared I, within my home beside my wife and baby boy?
Wast thou so jealous of one little coign of happiness that thou must
needs enter there,--thou, O Death?

A perfect life was his, all joy and love, with tears to make it
brighter,--sweet as a summer's day beside the Housatonic.  The world
loved him; the women kissed his curls, the men looked gravely into his
wonderful eyes, and the children hovered and fluttered about him.  I
can see him now, changing like the sky from sparkling laughter to
darkening frowns, and then to wondering thoughtfulness as he watched
the world.  He knew no color-line, poor dear--and the Veil, though it
shadowed him, had not yet darkened half his sun.  He loved the white
matron, he loved his black nurse; and in his little world walked souls
alone, uncolored and unclothed.  I--yea, all men--are larger and purer
by the infinite breadth of that one little life.  She who in simple
clearness of vision sees beyond the stars said when he had flown, "He
will be happy There; he ever loved beautiful things."  And I, far more
ignorant, and blind by the web of mine own weaving, sit alone winding
words and muttering, "If still he be, and he be There, and there be a
There, let him be happy, O Fate!"

Blithe was the morning of his burial, with bird and song and
sweet-smelling flowers.  The trees whispered to the grass, but the
children sat with hushed faces.  And yet it seemed a ghostly unreal
day,--the wraith of Life.  We seemed to rumble down an unknown street
behind a little white bundle of posies, with the shadow of a song in
our ears.  The busy city dinned about us; they did not say much, those
pale-faced hurrying men and women; they did not say much,--they only
glanced and said, "Niggers!"

We could not lay him in the ground there in Georgia, for the earth
there is strangely red; so we bore him away to the northward, with his
flowers and his little folded hands.  In vain, in vain!--for where, O
God!  beneath thy broad blue sky shall my dark baby rest in
peace,--where Reverence dwells, and Goodness, and a Freedom that is
free?

All that day and all that night there sat an awful gladness in my
heart,--nay, blame me not if I see the world thus darkly through the
Veil,--and my soul whispers ever to me saying, "Not dead, not dead, but
escaped; not bond, but free."  No bitter meanness now shall sicken his
baby heart till it die a living death, no taunt shall madden his happy
boyhood.  Fool that I was to think or wish that this little soul should
grow choked and deformed within the Veil!  I might have known that
yonder deep unworldly look that ever and anon floated past his eyes was
peering far beyond this narrow Now.  In the poise of his little
curl-crowned head did there not sit all that wild pride of being which
his father had hardly crushed in his own heart?  For what, forsooth,
shall a Negro want with pride amid the studied humiliations of fifty
million fellows?  Well sped, my boy, before the world had dubbed your
ambition insolence, had held your ideals unattainable, and taught you
to cringe and bow.  Better far this nameless void that stops my life
than a sea of sorrow for you.

Idle words; he might have borne his burden more bravely than we,--aye,
and found it lighter too, some day; for surely, surely this is not the
end.  Surely there shall yet dawn some mighty morning to lift the Veil
and set the prisoned free.  Not for me,--I shall die in my bonds,--but
for fresh young souls who have not known the night and waken to the
morning; a morning when men ask of the workman, not "Is he white?" but
"Can he work?"  When men ask artists, not "Are they black?" but "Do
they know?"  Some morning this may be, long, long years to come.  But
now there wails, on that dark shore within the Veil, the same deep
voice, THOU SHALT FOREGO!  And all have I foregone at that command, and
with small complaint,--all save that fair young form that lies so
coldly wed with death in the nest I had builded.

If one must have gone, why not I?  Why may I not rest me from this
restlessness and sleep from this wide waking?  Was not the world's
alembic, Time, in his young hands, and is not my time waning?  Are
there so many workers in the vineyard that the fair promise of this
little body could lightly be tossed away?  The wretched of my race that
line the alleys of the nation sit fatherless and unmothered; but Love
sat beside his cradle, and in his ear Wisdom waited to speak.  Perhaps
now he knows the All-love, and needs not to be wise.  Sleep, then,
child,--sleep till I sleep and waken to a baby voice and the ceaseless
patter of little feet--above the Veil.




XII

Of Alexander Crummell

  Then from the Dawn it seemed there came, but faint
  As from beyond the limit of the world,
  Like the last echo born of a great cry,
  Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice
  Around a king returning from his wars.

  TENNYSON.


This is the story of a human heart,--the tale of a black boy who many
long years ago began to struggle with life that he might know the world
and know himself.  Three temptations he met on those dark dunes that
lay gray and dismal before the wonder-eyes of the child: the temptation
of Hate, that stood out against the red dawn; the temptation of
Despair, that darkened noonday; and the temptation of Doubt, that ever
steals along with twilight.  Above all, you must hear of the vales he
crossed,--the Valley of Humiliation and the Valley of the Shadow of
Death.

I saw Alexander Crummell first at a Wilberforce commencement season,
amid its bustle and crush.  Tall, frail, and black he stood, with
simple dignity and an unmistakable air of good breeding.  I talked with
him apart, where the storming of the lusty young orators could not harm
us.  I spoke to him politely, then curiously, then eagerly, as I began
to feel the fineness of his character,--his calm courtesy, the
sweetness of his strength, and his fair blending of the hope and truth
of life.  Instinctively I bowed before this man, as one bows before the
prophets of the world.  Some seer he seemed, that came not from the
crimson Past or the gray To-come, but from the pulsing Now,--that
mocking world which seemed to me at once so light and dark, so splendid
and sordid.  Fourscore years had he wandered in this same world of
mine, within the Veil.

He was born with the Missouri Compromise and lay a-dying amid the
echoes of Manila and El Caney: stirring times for living, times dark to
look back upon, darker to look forward to. The black-faced lad that
paused over his mud and marbles seventy years ago saw puzzling vistas
as he looked down the world.  The slave-ship still groaned across the
Atlantic, faint cries burdened the Southern breeze, and the great black
father whispered mad tales of cruelty into those young ears.  From the
low doorway the mother silently watched her boy at play, and at
nightfall sought him eagerly lest the shadows bear him away to the land
of slaves.

So his young mind worked and winced and shaped curiously a vision of
Life; and in the midst of that vision ever stood one dark figure
alone,--ever with the hard, thick countenance of that bitter father,
and a form that fell in vast and shapeless folds.  Thus the temptation
of Hate grew and shadowed the growing child,--gliding stealthily into
his laughter, fading into his play, and seizing his dreams by day and
night with rough, rude turbulence.  So the black boy asked of sky and
sun and flower the never-answered Why? and loved, as he grew, neither
the world nor the world's rough ways.

Strange temptation for a child, you may think; and yet in this wide
land to-day a thousand thousand dark children brood before this same
temptation, and feel its cold and shuddering arms.  For them, perhaps,
some one will some day lift the Veil,--will come tenderly and cheerily
into those sad little lives and brush the brooding hate away, just as
Beriah Green strode in upon the life of Alexander Crummell.  And before
the bluff, kind-hearted man the shadow seemed less dark.  Beriah Green
had a school in Oneida County, New York, with a score of mischievous
boys.  "I'm going to bring a black boy here to educate," said Beriah
Green, as only a crank and an abolitionist would have dared to say.
"Oho!" laughed the boys.  "Ye-es," said his wife; and Alexander came.
Once before, the black boy had sought a school, had travelled, cold and
hungry, four hundred miles up into free New Hampshire, to Canaan.  But
the godly farmers hitched ninety yoke of oxen to the abolition
schoolhouse and dragged it into the middle of the swamp.  The black boy
trudged away.

The nineteenth was the first century of human sympathy,--the age when
half wonderingly we began to descry in others that transfigured spark
of divinity which we call Myself; when clodhoppers and peasants, and
tramps and thieves, and millionaires and--sometimes--Negroes, became
throbbing souls whose warm pulsing life touched us so nearly that we
half gasped with surprise, crying, "Thou too!  Hast Thou seen Sorrow
and the dull waters of Hopelessness?  Hast Thou known Life?"  And then
all helplessly we peered into those Other-worlds, and wailed, "O World
of Worlds, how shall man make you one?"

So in that little Oneida school there came to those schoolboys a
revelation of thought and longing beneath one black skin, of which they
had not dreamed before.  And to the lonely boy came a new dawn of
sympathy and inspiration.  The shadowy, formless thing--the temptation
of Hate, that hovered between him and the world--grew fainter and less
sinister.  It did not wholly fade away, but diffused itself and
lingered thick at the edges.  Through it the child now first saw the
blue and gold of life,--the sun-swept road that ran 'twixt heaven and
earth until in one far-off wan wavering line they met and kissed.  A
vision of life came to the growing boy,--mystic, wonderful.  He raised
his head, stretched himself, breathed deep of the fresh new air.
Yonder, behind the forests, he heard strange sounds; then glinting
through the trees he saw, far, far away, the bronzed hosts of a nation
calling,--calling faintly, calling loudly.  He heard the hateful clank
of their chains; he felt them cringe and grovel, and there rose within
him a protest and a prophecy.  And he girded himself to walk down the
world.

A voice and vision called him to be a priest,--a seer to lead the
uncalled out of the house of bondage.  He saw the headless host turn
toward him like the whirling of mad waters,--he stretched forth his
hands eagerly, and then, even as he stretched them, suddenly there
swept across the vision the temptation of Despair.

They were not wicked men,--the problem of life is not the problem of
the wicked,--they were calm, good men, Bishops of the Apostolic Church
of God, and strove toward righteousness.  They said slowly, "It is all
very natural--it is even commendable; but the General Theological
Seminary of the Episcopal Church cannot admit a Negro."  And when that
thin, half-grotesque figure still haunted their doors, they put their
hands kindly, half sorrowfully, on his shoulders, and said, "Now,--of
course, we--we know how YOU feel about it; but you see it is
impossible,--that is--well--it is premature.  Sometime, we
trust--sincerely trust--all such distinctions will fade away; but now
the world is as it is."

This was the temptation of Despair; and the young man fought it
doggedly.  Like some grave shadow he flitted by those halls, pleading,
arguing, half angrily demanding admittance, until there came the final
NO: until men hustled the disturber away, marked him as foolish,
unreasonable, and injudicious, a vain rebel against God's law.  And
then from that Vision Splendid all the glory faded slowly away, and
left an earth gray and stern rolling on beneath a dark despair.  Even
the kind hands that stretched themselves toward him from out the depths
of that dull morning seemed but parts of the purple shadows.  He saw
them coldly, and asked, "Why should I strive by special grace when the
way of the world is closed to me?"  All gently yet, the hands urged him
on,--the hands of young John Jay, that daring father's daring son; the
hands of the good folk of Boston, that free city.  And yet, with a way
to the priesthood of the Church open at last before him, the cloud
lingered there; and even when in old St. Paul's the venerable Bishop
raised his white arms above the Negro deacon--even then the burden had
not lifted from that heart, for there had passed a glory from the earth.

And yet the fire through which Alexander Crummell went did not burn in
vain.  Slowly and more soberly he took up again his plan of life.  More
critically he studied the situation.  Deep down below the slavery and
servitude of the Negro people he saw their fatal weaknesses, which long
years of mistreatment had emphasized.  The dearth of strong moral
character, of unbending righteousness, he felt, was their great
shortcoming, and here he would begin.  He would gather the best of his
people into some little Episcopal chapel and there lead, teach, and
inspire them, till the leaven spread, till the children grew, till the
world hearkened, till--till--and then across his dream gleamed some
faint after-glow of that first fair vision of youth--only an
after-glow, for there had passed a glory from the earth.

One day--it was in 1842, and the springtide was struggling merrily with
the May winds of New England--he stood at last in his own chapel in
Providence, a priest of the Church.  The days sped by, and the dark
young clergyman labored; he wrote his sermons carefully; he intoned his
prayers with a soft, earnest voice; he haunted the streets and accosted
the wayfarers; he visited the sick, and knelt beside the dying.  He
worked and toiled, week by week, day by day, month by month.  And yet
month by month the congregation dwindled, week by week the hollow walls
echoed more sharply, day by day the calls came fewer and fewer, and day
by day the third temptation sat clearer and still more clearly within
the Veil; a temptation, as it were, bland and smiling, with just a
shade of mockery in its smooth tones.  First it came casually, in the
cadence of a voice: "Oh, colored folks?  Yes."  Or perhaps more
definitely: "What do you EXPECT?"  In voice and gesture lay the
doubt--the temptation of Doubt.  How he hated it, and stormed at it
furiously!  "Of course they are capable," he cried; "of course they can
learn and strive and achieve--" and "Of course," added the temptation
softly, "they do nothing of the sort."  Of all the three temptations,
this one struck the deepest.  Hate?  He had outgrown so childish a
thing.  Despair?  He had steeled his right arm against it, and fought
it with the vigor of determination.  But to doubt the worth of his
life-work,--to doubt the destiny and capability of the race his soul
loved because it was his; to find listless squalor instead of eager
endeavor; to hear his own lips whispering, "They do not care; they
cannot know; they are dumb driven cattle,--why cast your pearls before
swine?"--this, this seemed more than man could bear; and he closed the
door, and sank upon the steps of the chancel, and cast his robe upon
the floor and writhed.

The evening sunbeams had set the dust to dancing in the gloomy chapel
when he arose.  He folded his vestments, put away the hymn-books, and
closed the great Bible.  He stepped out into the twilight, looked back
upon the narrow little pulpit with a weary smile, and locked the door.
Then he walked briskly to the Bishop, and told the Bishop what the
Bishop already knew.  "I have failed," he said simply.  And gaining
courage by the confession, he added: "What I need is a larger
constituency.  There are comparatively few Negroes here, and perhaps
they are not of the best.  I must go where the field is wider, and try
again."  So the Bishop sent him to Philadelphia, with a letter to
Bishop Onderdonk.

Bishop Onderdonk lived at the head of six white steps,--corpulent,
red-faced, and the author of several thrilling tracts on Apostolic
Succession.  It was after dinner, and the Bishop had settled himself
for a pleasant season of contemplation, when the bell must needs ring,
and there must burst in upon the Bishop a letter and a thin, ungainly
Negro.  Bishop Onderdonk read the letter hastily and frowned.
Fortunately, his mind was already clear on this point; and he cleared
his brow and looked at Crummell.  Then he said, slowly and
impressively: "I will receive you into this diocese on one condition:
no Negro priest can sit in my church convention, and no Negro church
must ask for representation there."

I sometimes fancy I can see that tableau: the frail black figure,
nervously twitching his hat before the massive abdomen of Bishop
Onderdonk; his threadbare coat thrown against the dark woodwork of the
bookcases, where Fox's "Lives of the Martyrs" nestled happily beside
"The Whole Duty of Man."  I seem to see the wide eyes of the Negro
wander past the Bishop's broadcloth to where the swinging glass doors
of the cabinet glow in the sunlight.  A little blue fly is trying to
cross the yawning keyhole.  He marches briskly up to it, peers into the
chasm in a surprised sort of way, and rubs his feelers reflectively;
then he essays its depths, and, finding it bottomless, draws back
again.  The dark-faced priest finds himself wondering if the fly too
has faced its Valley of Humiliation, and if it will plunge into
it,--when lo! it spreads its tiny wings and buzzes merrily across,
leaving the watcher wingless and alone.

Then the full weight of his burden fell upon him.  The rich walls
wheeled away, and before him lay the cold rough moor winding on through
life, cut in twain by one thick granite ridge,--here, the Valley of
Humiliation; yonder, the Valley of the Shadow of Death.  And I know not
which be darker,--no, not I. But this I know: in yonder Vale of the
Humble stand to-day a million swarthy men, who willingly would

  ". . . bear the whips and scorns of time,
  The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
  The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
  The insolence of office, and the spurns
  That patient merit of the unworthy takes,"--

all this and more would they bear did they but know that this were
sacrifice and not a meaner thing.  So surged the thought within that
lone black breast.  The Bishop cleared his throat suggestively; then,
recollecting that there was really nothing to say, considerately said
nothing, only sat tapping his foot impatiently.  But Alexander Crummell
said, slowly and heavily: "I will never enter your diocese on such
terms."  And saying this, he turned and passed into the Valley of the
Shadow of Death.  You might have noted only the physical dying, the
shattered frame and hacking cough; but in that soul lay deeper death
than that.  He found a chapel in New York,--the church of his father;
he labored for it in poverty and starvation, scorned by his fellow
priests.  Half in despair, he wandered across the sea, a beggar with
outstretched hands.  Englishmen clasped them,--Wilberforce and Stanley,
Thirwell and Ingles, and even Froude and Macaulay; Sir Benjamin Brodie
bade him rest awhile at Queen's College in Cambridge, and there he
lingered, struggling for health of body and mind, until he took his
degree in '53.  Restless still, and unsatisfied, he turned toward
Africa, and for long years, amid the spawn of the slave-smugglers,
sought a new heaven and a new earth.

So the man groped for light; all this was not Life,--it was the
world-wandering of a soul in search of itself, the striving of one who
vainly sought his place in the world, ever haunted by the shadow of a
death that is more than death,--the passing of a soul that has missed
its duty.  Twenty years he wandered,--twenty years and more; and yet
the hard rasping question kept gnawing within him, "What, in God's
name, am I on earth for?"  In the narrow New York parish his soul
seemed cramped and smothered.  In the fine old air of the English
University he heard the millions wailing over the sea.  In the wild
fever-cursed swamps of West Africa he stood helpless and alone.

You will not wonder at his weird pilgrimage,--you who in the swift
whirl of living, amid its cold paradox and marvellous vision, have
fronted life and asked its riddle face to face.  And if you find that
riddle hard to read, remember that yonder black boy finds it just a
little harder; if it is difficult for you to find and face your duty,
it is a shade more difficult for him; if your heart sickens in the
blood and dust of battle, remember that to him the dust is thicker and
the battle fiercer.  No wonder the wanderers fall!  No wonder we point
to thief and murderer, and haunting prostitute, and the never-ending
throng of unhearsed dead!  The Valley of the Shadow of Death gives few
of its pilgrims back to the world.

But Alexander Crummell it gave back.  Out of the temptation of Hate,
and burned by the fire of Despair, triumphant over Doubt, and steeled
by Sacrifice against Humiliation, he turned at last home across the
waters, humble and strong, gentle and determined.  He bent to all the
gibes and prejudices, to all hatred and discrimination, with that rare
courtesy which is the armor of pure souls.  He fought among his own,
the low, the grasping, and the wicked, with that unbending
righteousness which is the sword of the just.  He never faltered, he
seldom complained; he simply worked, inspiring the young, rebuking the
old, helping the weak, guiding the strong.

So he grew, and brought within his wide influence all that was best of
those who walk within the Veil.  They who live without knew not nor
dreamed of that full power within, that mighty inspiration which the
dull gauze of caste decreed that most men should not know.  And now
that he is gone, I sweep the Veil away and cry, Lo! the soul to whose
dear memory I bring this little tribute.  I can see his face still,
dark and heavy-lined beneath his snowy hair; lighting and shading, now
with inspiration for the future, now in innocent pain at some human
wickedness, now with sorrow at some hard memory from the past.  The
more I met Alexander Crummell, the more I felt how much that world was
losing which knew so little of him.  In another age he might have sat
among the elders of the land in purple-bordered toga; in another
country mothers might have sung him to the cradles.

He did his work,--he did it nobly and well; and yet I sorrow that here
he worked alone, with so little human sympathy.  His name to-day, in
this broad land, means little, and comes to fifty million ears laden
with no incense of memory or emulation.  And herein lies the tragedy of
the age: not that men are poor,--all men know something of poverty; not
that men are wicked,--who is good? not that men are ignorant,--what is
Truth?  Nay, but that men know so little of men.


He sat one morning gazing toward the sea.  He smiled and said, "The
gate is rusty on the hinges."  That night at starrise a wind came
moaning out of the west to blow the gate ajar, and then the soul I
loved fled like a flame across the Seas, and in its seat sat Death.

I wonder where he is to-day?  I wonder if in that dim world beyond, as
he came gliding in, there rose on some wan throne a King,--a dark and
pierced Jew, who knows the writhings of the earthly damned, saying, as
he laid those heart-wrung talents down, "Well done!" while round about
the morning stars sat singing.




XIII

Of the Coming of John

  What bring they 'neath the midnight,
    Beside the River-sea?
  They bring the human heart wherein
    No nightly calm can be;
  That droppeth never with the wind,
    Nor drieth with the dew;
  O calm it, God; thy calm is broad
    To cover spirits too.

   The river floweth on.

  MRS. BROWNING.


Carlisle Street runs westward from the centre of Johnstown, across a
great black bridge, down a hill and up again, by little shops and
meat-markets, past single-storied homes, until suddenly it stops
against a wide green lawn.  It is a broad, restful place, with two
large buildings outlined against the west.  When at evening the winds
come swelling from the east, and the great pall of the city's smoke
hangs wearily above the valley, then the red west glows like a
dreamland down Carlisle Street, and, at the tolling of the supper-bell,
throws the passing forms of students in dark silhouette against the
sky.  Tall and black, they move slowly by, and seem in the sinister
light to flit before the city like dim warning ghosts.  Perhaps they
are; for this is Wells Institute, and these black students have few
dealings with the white city below.

And if you will notice, night after night, there is one dark form that
ever hurries last and late toward the twinkling lights of Swain
Hall,--for Jones is never on time.  A long, straggling fellow he is,
brown and hard-haired, who seems to be growing straight out of his
clothes, and walks with a half-apologetic roll.  He used perpetually to
set the quiet dining-room into waves of merriment, as he stole to his
place after the bell had tapped for prayers; he seemed so perfectly
awkward.  And yet one glance at his face made one forgive him
much,--that broad, good-natured smile in which lay no bit of art or
artifice, but seemed just bubbling good-nature and genuine satisfaction
with the world.

He came to us from Altamaha, away down there beneath the gnarled oaks
of Southeastern Georgia, where the sea croons to the sands and the
sands listen till they sink half drowned beneath the waters, rising
only here and there in long, low islands.  The white folk of Altamaha
voted John a good boy,--fine plough-hand, good in the rice-fields,
handy everywhere, and always good-natured and respectful.  But they
shook their heads when his mother wanted to send him off to school.
"It'll spoil him,--ruin him," they said; and they talked as though they
knew.  But full half the black folk followed him proudly to the
station, and carried his queer little trunk and many bundles.  And
there they shook and shook hands, and the girls kissed him shyly and
the boys clapped him on the back.  So the train came, and he pinched
his little sister lovingly, and put his great arms about his mother's
neck, and then was away with a puff and a roar into the great yellow
world that flamed and flared about the doubtful pilgrim.  Up the coast
they hurried, past the squares and palmettos of Savannah, through the
cotton-fields and through the weary night, to Millville, and came with
the morning to the noise and bustle of Johnstown.

And they that stood behind, that morning in Altamaha, and watched the
train as it noisily bore playmate and brother and son away to the
world, had thereafter one ever-recurring word,--"When John comes." Then
what parties were to be, and what speakings in the churches; what new
furniture in the front room,--perhaps even a new front room; and there
would be a new schoolhouse, with John as teacher; and then perhaps a
big wedding; all this and more--when John comes.  But the white people
shook their heads.

At first he was coming at Christmas-time,--but the vacation proved too
short; and then, the next summer,--but times were hard and schooling
costly, and so, instead, he worked in Johnstown.  And so it drifted to
the next summer, and the next,--till playmates scattered, and mother
grew gray, and sister went up to the Judge's kitchen to work.  And
still the legend lingered,--"When John comes."

Up at the Judge's they rather liked this refrain; for they too had a
John--a fair-haired, smooth-faced boy, who had played many a long
summer's day to its close with his darker namesake.  "Yes, sir!  John
is at Princeton, sir," said the broad-shouldered gray-haired Judge
every morning as he marched down to the post-office.  "Showing the
Yankees what a Southern gentleman can do," he added; and strode home
again with his letters and papers.  Up at the great pillared house they
lingered long over the Princeton letter,--the Judge and his frail wife,
his sister and growing daughters.  "It'll make a man of him," said the
Judge, "college is the place."  And then he asked the shy little
waitress, "Well, Jennie, how's your John?" and added reflectively, "Too
bad, too bad your mother sent him off--it will spoil him."  And the
waitress wondered.

Thus in the far-away Southern village the world lay waiting, half
consciously, the coming of two young men, and dreamed in an
inarticulate way of new things that would be done and new thoughts that
all would think.  And yet it was singular that few thought of two
Johns,--for the black folk thought of one John, and he was black; and
the white folk thought of another John, and he was white.  And neither
world thought the other world's thought, save with a vague unrest.

Up in Johnstown, at the Institute, we were long puzzled at the case of
John Jones.  For a long time the clay seemed unfit for any sort of
moulding.  He was loud and boisterous, always laughing and singing, and
never able to work consecutively at anything.  He did not know how to
study; he had no idea of thoroughness; and with his tardiness,
carelessness, and appalling good-humor, we were sore perplexed.  One
night we sat in faculty-meeting, worried and serious; for Jones was in
trouble again.  This last escapade was too much, and so we solemnly
voted "that Jones, on account of repeated disorder and inattention to
work, be suspended for the rest of the term."

It seemed to us that the first time life ever struck Jones as a really
serious thing was when the Dean told him he must leave school.  He
stared at the gray-haired man blankly, with great eyes.  "Why,--why,"
he faltered, "but--I haven't graduated!"  Then the Dean slowly and
clearly explained, reminding him of the tardiness and the carelessness,
of the poor lessons and neglected work, of the noise and disorder,
until the fellow hung his head in confusion.  Then he said quickly,
"But you won't tell mammy and sister,--you won't write mammy, now will
you?  For if you won't I'll go out into the city and work, and come
back next term and show you something."  So the Dean promised
faithfully, and John shouldered his little trunk, giving neither word
nor look to the giggling boys, and walked down Carlisle Street to the
great city, with sober eyes and a set and serious face.

Perhaps we imagined it, but someway it seemed to us that the serious
look that crept over his boyish face that afternoon never left it
again.  When he came back to us he went to work with all his rugged
strength.  It was a hard struggle, for things did not come easily to
him,--few crowding memories of early life and teaching came to help him
on his new way; but all the world toward which he strove was of his own
building, and he builded slow and hard.  As the light dawned
lingeringly on his new creations, he sat rapt and silent before the
vision, or wandered alone over the green campus peering through and
beyond the world of men into a world of thought.  And the thoughts at
times puzzled him sorely; he could not see just why the circle was not
square, and carried it out fifty-six decimal places one
midnight,--would have gone further, indeed, had not the matron rapped
for lights out.  He caught terrible colds lying on his back in the
meadows of nights, trying to think out the solar system; he had grave
doubts as to the ethics of the Fall of Rome, and strongly suspected the
Germans of being thieves and rascals, despite his textbooks; he
pondered long over every new Greek word, and wondered why this meant
that and why it couldn't mean something else, and how it must have felt
to think all things in Greek.  So he thought and puzzled along for
himself,--pausing perplexed where others skipped merrily, and walking
steadily through the difficulties where the rest stopped and
surrendered.

Thus he grew in body and soul, and with him his clothes seemed to grow
and arrange themselves; coat sleeves got longer, cuffs appeared, and
collars got less soiled.  Now and then his boots shone, and a new
dignity crept into his walk.  And we who saw daily a new thoughtfulness
growing in his eyes began to expect something of this plodding boy.
Thus he passed out of the preparatory school into college, and we who
watched him felt four more years of change, which almost transformed
the tall, grave man who bowed to us commencement morning.  He had left
his queer thought-world and come back to a world of motion and of men.
He looked now for the first time sharply about him, and wondered he had
seen so little before.  He grew slowly to feel almost for the first
time the Veil that lay between him and the white world; he first
noticed now the oppression that had not seemed oppression before,
differences that erstwhile seemed natural, restraints and slights that
in his boyhood days had gone unnoticed or been greeted with a laugh.
He felt angry now when men did not call him "Mister," he clenched his
hands at the "Jim Crow" cars, and chafed at the color-line that hemmed
in him and his.  A tinge of sarcasm crept into his speech, and a vague
bitterness into his life; and he sat long hours wondering and planning
a way around these crooked things.  Daily he found himself shrinking
from the choked and narrow life of his native town.  And yet he always
planned to go back to Altamaha,--always planned to work there.  Still,
more and more as the day approached he hesitated with a nameless dread;
and even the day after graduation he seized with eagerness the offer of
the Dean to send him North with the quartette during the summer
vacation, to sing for the Institute.  A breath of air before the
plunge, he said to himself in half apology.

It was a bright September afternoon, and the streets of New York were
brilliant with moving men.  They reminded John of the sea, as he sat in
the square and watched them, so changelessly changing, so bright and
dark, so grave and gay.  He scanned their rich and faultless clothes,
the way they carried their hands, the shape of their hats; he peered
into the hurrying carriages.  Then, leaning back with a sigh, he said,
"This is the World."  The notion suddenly seized him to see where the
world was going; since many of the richer and brighter seemed hurrying
all one way.  So when a tall, light-haired young man and a little
talkative lady came by, he rose half hesitatingly and followed them.
Up the street they went, past stores and gay shops, across a broad
square, until with a hundred others they entered the high portal of a
great building.

He was pushed toward the ticket-office with the others, and felt in his
pocket for the new five-dollar bill he had hoarded.  There seemed
really no time for hesitation, so he drew it bravely out, passed it to
the busy clerk, and received simply a ticket but no change.  When at
last he realized that he had paid five dollars to enter he knew not
what, he stood stockstill amazed.  "Be careful," said a low voice
behind him; "you must not lynch the colored gentleman simply because
he's in your way," and a girl looked up roguishly into the eyes of her
fair-haired escort.  A shade of annoyance passed over the escort's
face.  "You WILL not understand us at the South," he said half
impatiently, as if continuing an argument.  "With all your professions,
one never sees in the North so cordial and intimate relations between
white and black as are everyday occurrences with us.  Why, I remember
my closest playfellow in boyhood was a little Negro named after me, and
surely no two,--WELL!" The man stopped short and flushed to the roots
of his hair, for there directly beside his reserved orchestra chairs
sat the Negro he had stumbled over in the hallway.  He hesitated and
grew pale with anger, called the usher and gave him his card, with a
few peremptory words, and slowly sat down.  The lady deftly changed the
subject.

All this John did not see, for he sat in a half-daze minding the scene
about him; the delicate beauty of the hall, the faint perfume, the
moving myriad of men, the rich clothing and low hum of talking seemed
all a part of a world so different from his, so strangely more
beautiful than anything he had known, that he sat in dreamland, and
started when, after a hush, rose high and clear the music of
Lohengrin's swan.  The infinite beauty of the wail lingered and swept
through every muscle of his frame, and put it all a-tune.  He closed
his eyes and grasped the elbows of the chair, touching unwittingly the
lady's arm.  And the lady drew away.  A deep longing swelled in all his
heart to rise with that clear music out of the dirt and dust of that
low life that held him prisoned and befouled.  If he could only live up
in the free air where birds sang and setting suns had no touch of
blood!  Who had called him to be the slave and butt of all?  And if he
had called, what right had he to call when a world like this lay open
before men?

Then the movement changed, and fuller, mightier harmony swelled away.
He looked thoughtfully across the hall, and wondered why the beautiful
gray-haired woman looked so listless, and what the little man could be
whispering about.  He would not like to be listless and idle, he
thought, for he felt with the music the movement of power within him.
If he but had some master-work, some life-service, hard,--aye, bitter
hard, but without the cringing and sickening servility, without the
cruel hurt that hardened his heart and soul.  When at last a soft
sorrow crept across the violins, there came to him the vision of a
far-off home, the great eyes of his sister, and the dark drawn face of
his mother.  And his heart sank below the waters, even as the sea-sand
sinks by the shores of Altamaha, only to be lifted aloft again with
that last ethereal wail of the swan that quivered and faded away into
the sky.

It left John sitting so silent and rapt that he did not for some time
notice the usher tapping him lightly on the shoulder and saying
politely, "Will you step this way, please, sir?"  A little surprised,
he arose quickly at the last tap, and, turning to leave his seat,
looked full into the face of the fair-haired young man.  For the first
time the young man recognized his dark boyhood playmate, and John knew
that it was the Judge's son.  The White John started, lifted his hand,
and then froze into his chair; the black John smiled lightly, then
grimly, and followed the usher down the aisle.  The manager was sorry,
very, very sorry,--but he explained that some mistake had been made in
selling the gentleman a seat already disposed of; he would refund the
money, of course,--and indeed felt the matter keenly, and so forth,
and--before he had finished John was gone, walking hurriedly across the
square and down the broad streets, and as he passed the park he
buttoned his coat and said, "John Jones, you're a natural-born fool."
Then he went to his lodgings and wrote a letter, and tore it up; he
wrote another, and threw it in the fire.  Then he seized a scrap of
paper and wrote: "Dear Mother and Sister--I am coming--John."

"Perhaps," said John, as he settled himself on the train, "perhaps I am
to blame myself in struggling against my manifest destiny simply
because it looks hard and unpleasant.  Here is my duty to Altamaha
plain before me; perhaps they'll let me help settle the Negro problems
there,--perhaps they won't.  'I will go in to the King, which is not
according to the law; and if I perish, I perish.'" And then he mused
and dreamed, and planned a life-work; and the train flew south.

Down in Altamaha, after seven long years, all the world knew John was
coming.  The homes were scrubbed and scoured,--above all, one; the
gardens and yards had an unwonted trimness, and Jennie bought a new
gingham.  With some finesse and negotiation, all the dark Methodists
and Presbyterians were induced to join in a monster welcome at the
Baptist Church; and as the day drew near, warm discussions arose on
every corner as to the exact extent and nature of John's
accomplishments.  It was noontide on a gray and cloudy day when he
came.  The black town flocked to the depot, with a little of the white
at the edges,--a happy throng, with "Good-mawnings" and "Howdys" and
laughing and joking and jostling.  Mother sat yonder in the window
watching; but sister Jennie stood on the platform, nervously fingering
her dress, tall and lithe, with soft brown skin and loving eyes peering
from out a tangled wilderness of hair.  John rose gloomily as the train
stopped, for he was thinking of the "Jim Crow" car; he stepped to the
platform, and paused: a little dingy station, a black crowd gaudy and
dirty, a half-mile of dilapidated shanties along a straggling ditch of
mud.  An overwhelming sense of the sordidness and narrowness of it all
seized him; he looked in vain for his mother, kissed coldly the tall,
strange girl who called him brother, spoke a short, dry word here and
there; then, lingering neither for handshaking nor gossip, started
silently up the street, raising his hat merely to the last eager old
aunty, to her open-mouthed astonishment.  The people were distinctly
bewildered.  This silent, cold man,--was this John?  Where was his
smile and hearty hand-grasp?  "'Peared kind o' down in the mouf," said
the Methodist preacher thoughtfully.  "Seemed monstus stuck up,"
complained a Baptist sister.  But the white postmaster from the edge of
the crowd expressed the opinion of his folks plainly.  "That damn
Nigger," said he, as he shouldered the mail and arranged his tobacco,
"has gone North and got plum full o' fool notions; but they won't work
in Altamaha."  And the crowd melted away.

The meeting of welcome at the Baptist Church was a failure.  Rain
spoiled the barbecue, and thunder turned the milk in the ice-cream.
When the speaking came at night, the house was crowded to overflowing.
The three preachers had especially prepared themselves, but somehow
John's manner seemed to throw a blanket over everything,--he seemed so
cold and preoccupied, and had so strange an air of restraint that the
Methodist brother could not warm up to his theme and elicited not a
single "Amen"; the Presbyterian prayer was but feebly responded to, and
even the Baptist preacher, though he wakened faint enthusiasm, got so
mixed up in his favorite sentence that he had to close it by stopping
fully fifteen minutes sooner than he meant.  The people moved uneasily
in their seats as John rose to reply.  He spoke slowly and
methodically.  The age, he said, demanded new ideas; we were far
different from those men of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries,--with broader ideas of human brotherhood and destiny.  Then
he spoke of the rise of charity and popular education, and particularly
of the spread of wealth and work.  The question was, then, he added
reflectively, looking at the low discolored ceiling, what part the
Negroes of this land would take in the striving of the new century.  He
sketched in vague outline the new Industrial School that might rise
among these pines, he spoke in detail of the charitable and
philanthropic work that might be organized, of money that might be
saved for banks and business.  Finally he urged unity, and deprecated
especially religious and denominational bickering.  "To-day," he said,
with a smile, "the world cares little whether a man be Baptist or
Methodist, or indeed a churchman at all, so long as he is good and
true.  What difference does it make whether a man be baptized in river
or washbowl, or not at all?  Let's leave all that littleness, and look
higher."  Then, thinking of nothing else, he slowly sat down.  A
painful hush seized that crowded mass.  Little had they understood of
what he said, for he spoke an unknown tongue, save the last word about
baptism; that they knew, and they sat very still while the clock
ticked.  Then at last a low suppressed snarl came from the Amen corner,
and an old bent man arose, walked over the seats, and climbed straight
up into the pulpit.  He was wrinkled and black, with scant gray and
tufted hair; his voice and hands shook as with palsy; but on his face
lay the intense rapt look of the religious fanatic.  He seized the
Bible with his rough, huge hands; twice he raised it inarticulate, and
then fairly burst into words, with rude and awful eloquence.  He
quivered, swayed, and bent; then rose aloft in perfect majesty, till
the people moaned and wept, wailed and shouted, and a wild shrieking
arose from the corners where all the pent-up feeling of the hour
gathered itself and rushed into the air.  John never knew clearly what
the old man said; he only felt himself held up to scorn and scathing
denunciation for trampling on the true Religion, and he realized with
amazement that all unknowingly he had put rough, rude hands on
something this little world held sacred.  He arose silently, and passed
out into the night.  Down toward the sea he went, in the fitful
starlight, half conscious of the girl who followed timidly after him.
When at last he stood upon the bluff, he turned to his little sister
and looked upon her sorrowfully, remembering with sudden pain how
little thought he had given her.  He put his arm about her and let her
passion of tears spend itself on his shoulder.

Long they stood together, peering over the gray unresting water.

"John," she said, "does it make every one--unhappy when they study and
learn lots of things?"

He paused and smiled.  "I am afraid it does," he said.

"And, John, are you glad you studied?"

"Yes," came the answer, slowly but positively.

She watched the flickering lights upon the sea, and said thoughtfully,
"I wish I was unhappy,--and--and," putting both arms about his neck, "I
think I am, a little, John."

It was several days later that John walked up to the Judge's house to
ask for the privilege of teaching the Negro school.  The Judge himself
met him at the front door, stared a little hard at him, and said
brusquely, "Go 'round to the kitchen door, John, and wait."  Sitting on
the kitchen steps, John stared at the corn, thoroughly perplexed.  What
on earth had come over him?  Every step he made offended some one.  He
had come to save his people, and before he left the depot he had hurt
them.  He sought to teach them at the church, and had outraged their
deepest feelings.  He had schooled himself to be respectful to the
Judge, and then blundered into his front door.  And all the time he had
meant right,--and yet, and yet, somehow he found it so hard and strange
to fit his old surroundings again, to find his place in the world about
him.  He could not remember that he used to have any difficulty in the
past, when life was glad and gay.  The world seemed smooth and easy
then.  Perhaps,--but his sister came to the kitchen door just then and
said the Judge awaited him.

The Judge sat in the dining-room amid his morning's mail, and he did
not ask John to sit down.  He plunged squarely into the business.
"You've come for the school, I suppose.  Well John, I want to speak to
you plainly.  You know I'm a friend to your people.  I've helped you
and your family, and would have done more if you hadn't got the notion
of going off.  Now I like the colored people, and sympathize with all
their reasonable aspirations; but you and I both know, John, that in
this country the Negro must remain subordinate, and can never expect to
be the equal of white men.  In their place, your people can be honest
and respectful; and God knows, I'll do what I can to help them.  But
when they want to reverse nature, and rule white men, and marry white
women, and sit in my parlor, then, by God! we'll hold them under if we
have to lynch every Nigger in the land.  Now, John, the question is,
are you, with your education and Northern notions, going to accept the
situation and teach the darkies to be faithful servants and laborers as
your fathers were,--I knew your father, John, he belonged to my
brother, and he was a good Nigger.  Well--well, are you going to be
like him, or are you going to try to put fool ideas of rising and
equality into these folks' heads, and make them discontented and
unhappy?"

"I am going to accept the situation, Judge Henderson," answered John,
with a brevity that did not escape the keen old man.  He hesitated a
moment, and then said shortly, "Very well,--we'll try you awhile.
Good-morning."

It was a full month after the opening of the Negro school that the
other John came home, tall, gay, and headstrong.  The mother wept, the
sisters sang.  The whole white town was glad.  A proud man was the
Judge, and it was a goodly sight to see the two swinging down Main
Street together.  And yet all did not go smoothly between them, for the
younger man could not and did not veil his contempt for the little
town, and plainly had his heart set on New York.  Now the one cherished
ambition of the Judge was to see his son mayor of Altamaha,
representative to the legislature, and--who could say?--governor of
Georgia.  So the argument often waxed hot between them.  "Good heavens,
father," the younger man would say after dinner, as he lighted a cigar
and stood by the fireplace, "you surely don't expect a young fellow
like me to settle down permanently in this--this God-forgotten town
with nothing but mud and Negroes?"  "I did," the Judge would answer
laconically; and on this particular day it seemed from the gathering
scowl that he was about to add something more emphatic, but neighbors
had already begun to drop in to admire his son, and the conversation
drifted.

"Heah that John is livenin' things up at the darky school," volunteered
the postmaster, after a pause.

"What now?" asked the Judge, sharply.

"Oh, nothin' in particulah,--just his almighty air and uppish ways.
B'lieve I did heah somethin' about his givin' talks on the French
Revolution, equality, and such like.  He's what I call a dangerous
Nigger."

"Have you heard him say anything out of the way?"

"Why, no,--but Sally, our girl, told my wife a lot of rot.  Then, too,
I don't need to heah: a Nigger what won't say 'sir' to a white man,
or--"

"Who is this John?" interrupted the son.

"Why, it's little black John, Peggy's son,--your old playfellow."

The young man's face flushed angrily, and then he laughed.

"Oh," said he, "it's the darky that tried to force himself into a seat
beside the lady I was escorting--"

But Judge Henderson waited to hear no more.  He had been nettled all
day, and now at this he rose with a half-smothered oath, took his hat
and cane, and walked straight to the schoolhouse.

For John, it had been a long, hard pull to get things started in the
rickety old shanty that sheltered his school.  The Negroes were rent
into factions for and against him, the parents were careless, the
children irregular and dirty, and books, pencils, and slates largely
missing.  Nevertheless, he struggled hopefully on, and seemed to see at
last some glimmering of dawn.  The attendance was larger and the
children were a shade cleaner this week.  Even the booby class in
reading showed a little comforting progress.  So John settled himself
with renewed patience this afternoon.

"Now, Mandy," he said cheerfully, "that's better; but you mustn't chop
your words up so: 'If--the-man--goes.' Why, your little brother even
wouldn't tell a story that way, now would he?"

"Naw, suh, he cain't talk."

"All right; now let's try again: 'If the man--'

"John!"

The whole school started in surprise, and the teacher half arose, as
the red, angry face of the Judge appeared in the open doorway.

"John, this school is closed.  You children can go home and get to
work.  The white people of Altamaha are not spending their money on
black folks to have their heads crammed with impudence and lies.  Clear
out!  I'll lock the door myself."

Up at the great pillared house the tall young son wandered aimlessly
about after his father's abrupt departure.  In the house there was
little to interest him; the books were old and stale, the local
newspaper flat, and the women had retired with headaches and sewing.
He tried a nap, but it was too warm.  So he sauntered out into the
fields, complaining disconsolately, "Good Lord! how long will this
imprisonment last!"  He was not a bad fellow,--just a little spoiled
and self-indulgent, and as headstrong as his proud father.  He seemed a
young man pleasant to look upon, as he sat on the great black stump at
the edge of the pines idly swinging his legs and smoking.  "Why, there
isn't even a girl worth getting up a respectable flirtation with," he
growled.  Just then his eye caught a tall, willowy figure hurrying
toward him on the narrow path.  He looked with interest at first, and
then burst into a laugh as he said, "Well, I declare, if it isn't
Jennie, the little brown kitchen-maid!  Why, I never noticed before
what a trim little body she is.  Hello, Jennie!  Why, you haven't
kissed me since I came home," he said gaily.  The young girl stared at
him in surprise and confusion,--faltered something inarticulate, and
attempted to pass.  But a wilful mood had seized the young idler, and
he caught at her arm.  Frightened, she slipped by; and half
mischievously he turned and ran after her through the tall pines.

Yonder, toward the sea, at the end of the path, came John slowly, with
his head down.  He had turned wearily homeward from the schoolhouse;
then, thinking to shield his mother from the blow, started to meet his
sister as she came from work and break the news of his dismissal to
her.  "I'll go away," he said slowly; "I'll go away and find work, and
send for them.  I cannot live here longer."  And then the fierce,
buried anger surged up into his throat.  He waved his arms and hurried
wildly up the path.

The great brown sea lay silent.  The air scarce breathed.  The dying
day bathed the twisted oaks and mighty pines in black and gold.  There
came from the wind no warning, not a whisper from the cloudless sky.
There was only a black man hurrying on with an ache in his heart,
seeing neither sun nor sea, but starting as from a dream at the
frightened cry that woke the pines, to see his dark sister struggling
in the arms of a tall and fair-haired man.

He said not a word, but, seizing a fallen limb, struck him with all the
pent-up hatred of his great black arm, and the body lay white and still
beneath the pines, all bathed in sunshine and in blood.  John looked at
it dreamily, then walked back to the house briskly, and said in a soft
voice, "Mammy, I'm going away--I'm going to be free."

She gazed at him dimly and faltered, "No'th, honey, is yo' gwine No'th
agin?"

He looked out where the North Star glistened pale above the waters, and
said, "Yes, mammy, I'm going--North."

Then, without another word, he went out into the narrow lane, up by the
straight pines, to the same winding path, and seated himself on the
great black stump, looking at the blood where the body had lain.
Yonder in the gray past he had played with that dead boy, romping
together under the solemn trees.  The night deepened; he thought of the
boys at Johnstown.  He wondered how Brown had turned out, and Carey?
And Jones,--Jones?  Why, he was Jones, and he wondered what they would
all say when they knew, when they knew, in that great long dining-room
with its hundreds of merry eyes.  Then as the sheen of the starlight
stole over him, he thought of the gilded ceiling of that vast concert
hall, heard stealing toward him the faint sweet music of the swan.
Hark! was it music, or the hurry and shouting of men?  Yes, surely!
Clear and high the faint sweet melody rose and fluttered like a living
thing, so that the very earth trembled as with the tramp of horses and
murmur of angry men.

He leaned back and smiled toward the sea, whence rose the strange
melody, away from the dark shadows where lay the noise of horses
galloping, galloping on.  With an effort he roused himself, bent
forward, and looked steadily down the pathway, softly humming the "Song
of the Bride,"--

  "Freudig gefuhrt, ziehet dahin."

Amid the trees in the dim morning twilight he watched their shadows
dancing and heard their horses thundering toward him, until at last
they came sweeping like a storm, and he saw in front that haggard
white-haired man, whose eyes flashed red with fury.  Oh, how he pitied
him,--pitied him,--and wondered if he had the coiling twisted rope.
Then, as the storm burst round him, he rose slowly to his feet and
turned his closed eyes toward the Sea.

And the world whistled in his ears.




XIV

Of the Sorrow Songs

  I walk through the churchyard
      To lay this body down;
  I know moon-rise, I know star-rise;
  I walk in the moonlight, I walk in the starlight;
  I'll lie in the grave and stretch out my arms,
  I'll go to judgment in the evening of the day,
  And my soul and thy soul shall meet that day,
      When I lay this body down.

  NEGRO SONG.


They that walked in darkness sang songs in the olden days--Sorrow
Songs--for they were weary at heart.  And so before each thought that I
have written in this book I have set a phrase, a haunting echo of these
weird old songs in which the soul of the black slave spoke to men.
Ever since I was a child these songs have stirred me strangely.  They
came out of the South unknown to me, one by one, and yet at once I knew
them as of me and of mine.  Then in after years when I came to
Nashville I saw the great temple builded of these songs towering over
the pale city.  To me Jubilee Hall seemed ever made of the songs
themselves, and its bricks were red with the blood and dust of toil.
Out of them rose for me morning, noon, and night, bursts of wonderful
melody, full of the voices of my brothers and sisters, full of the
voices of the past.

Little of beauty has America given the world save the rude grandeur God
himself stamped on her bosom; the human spirit in this new world has
expressed itself in vigor and ingenuity rather than in beauty.  And so
by fateful chance the Negro folk-song--the rhythmic cry of the
slave--stands to-day not simply as the sole American music, but as the
most beautiful expression of human experience born this side the seas.
It has been neglected, it has been, and is, half despised, and above
all it has been persistently mistaken and misunderstood; but
notwithstanding, it still remains as the singular spiritual heritage of
the nation and the greatest gift of the Negro people.

Away back in the thirties the melody of these slave songs stirred the
nation, but the songs were soon half forgotten.  Some, like "Near the
lake where drooped the willow," passed into current airs and their
source was forgotten; others were caricatured on the "minstrel" stage
and their memory died away.  Then in war-time came the singular Port
Royal experiment after the capture of Hilton Head, and perhaps for the
first time the North met the Southern slave face to face and heart to
heart with no third witness.  The Sea Islands of the Carolinas, where
they met, were filled with a black folk of primitive type, touched and
moulded less by the world about them than any others outside the Black
Belt.  Their appearance was uncouth, their language funny, but their
hearts were human and their singing stirred men with a mighty power.
Thomas Wentworth Higginson hastened to tell of these songs, and Miss
McKim and others urged upon the world their rare beauty.  But the world
listened only half credulously until the Fisk Jubilee Singers sang the
slave songs so deeply into the world's heart that it can never wholly
forget them again.

There was once a blacksmith's son born at Cadiz, New York, who in the
changes of time taught school in Ohio and helped defend Cincinnati from
Kirby Smith.  Then he fought at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg and
finally served in the Freedmen's Bureau at Nashville.  Here he formed a
Sunday-school class of black children in 1866, and sang with them and
taught them to sing.  And then they taught him to sing, and when once
the glory of the Jubilee songs passed into the soul of George L. White,
he knew his life-work was to let those Negroes sing to the world as
they had sung to him.  So in 1871 the pilgrimage of the Fisk Jubilee
Singers began.  North to Cincinnati they rode,--four half-clothed black
boys and five girl-women,--led by a man with a cause and a purpose.
They stopped at Wilberforce, the oldest of Negro schools, where a black
bishop blessed them.  Then they went, fighting cold and starvation,
shut out of hotels, and cheerfully sneered at, ever northward; and ever
the magic of their song kept thrilling hearts, until a burst of
applause in the Congregational Council at Oberlin revealed them to the
world.  They came to New York and Henry Ward Beecher dared to welcome
them, even though the metropolitan dailies sneered at his "Nigger
Minstrels."  So their songs conquered till they sang across the land
and across the sea, before Queen and Kaiser, in Scotland and Ireland,
Holland and Switzerland.  Seven years they sang, and brought back a
hundred and fifty thousand dollars to found Fisk University.

Since their day they have been imitated--sometimes well, by the singers
of Hampton and Atlanta, sometimes ill, by straggling quartettes.
Caricature has sought again to spoil the quaint beauty of the music,
and has filled the air with many debased melodies which vulgar ears
scarce know from the real.  But the true Negro folk-song still lives in
the hearts of those who have heard them truly sung and in the hearts of
the Negro people.

What are these songs, and what do they mean?  I know little of music
and can say nothing in technical phrase, but I know something of men,
and knowing them, I know that these songs are the articulate message of
the slave to the world.  They tell us in these eager days that life was
joyous to the black slave, careless and happy.  I can easily believe
this of some, of many.  But not all the past South, though it rose from
the dead, can gainsay the heart-touching witness of these songs.  They
are the music of an unhappy people, of the children of disappointment;
they tell of death and suffering and unvoiced longing toward a truer
world, of misty wanderings and hidden ways.

The songs are indeed the siftings of centuries; the music is far more
ancient than the words, and in it we can trace here and there signs of
development.  My grandfather's grandmother was seized by an evil Dutch
trader two centuries ago; and coming to the valleys of the Hudson and
Housatonic, black, little, and lithe, she shivered and shrank in the
harsh north winds, looked longingly at the hills, and often crooned a
heathen melody to the child between her knees, thus:

  Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!
  Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!
  Ben d' nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, ben d' le.


The child sang it to his children and they to their children's
children, and so two hundred years it has travelled down to us and we
sing it to our children, knowing as little as our fathers what its
words may mean, but knowing well the meaning of its music.

This was primitive African music; it may be seen in larger form in the
strange chant which heralds "The Coming of John":

  "You may bury me in the East,
   You may bury me in the West,
   But I'll hear the trumpet sound in that morning,"

--the voice of exile.

Ten master songs, more or less, one may pluck from the forest of
melody-songs of undoubted Negro origin and wide popular currency, and
songs peculiarly characteristic of the slave.  One of these I have just
mentioned.  Another whose strains begin this book is "Nobody knows the
trouble I've seen."  When, struck with a sudden poverty, the United
States refused to fulfill its promises of land to the freedmen, a
brigadier-general went down to the Sea Islands to carry the news.  An
old woman on the outskirts of the throng began singing this song; all
the mass joined with her, swaying.  And the soldier wept.

The third song is the cradle-song of death which all men know,-"Swing
low, sweet chariot,"--whose bars begin the life story of "Alexander
Crummell."  Then there is the song of many waters, "Roll, Jordan,
roll," a mighty chorus with minor cadences.  There were many songs of
the fugitive like that which opens "The Wings of Atalanta," and the
more familiar "Been a-listening."  The seventh is the song of the End
and the Beginning--"My Lord, what a mourning! when the stars begin to
fall"; a strain of this is placed before "The Dawn of Freedom."  The
song of groping--"My way's cloudy"--begins "The Meaning of Progress";
the ninth is the song of this chapter--"Wrestlin' Jacob, the day is
a-breaking,"--a paean of hopeful strife.  The last master song is the
song of songs--"Steal away,"--sprung from "The Faith of the Fathers."

There are many others of the Negro folk-songs as striking and
characteristic as these, as, for instance, the three strains in the
third, eighth, and ninth chapters; and others I am sure could easily
make a selection on more scientific principles.  There are, too, songs
that seem to be a step removed from the more primitive types: there is
the maze-like medley, "Bright sparkles," one phrase of which heads "The
Black Belt"; the Easter carol, "Dust, dust and ashes"; the dirge, "My
mother's took her flight and gone home"; and that burst of melody
hovering over "The Passing of the First-Born"--"I hope my mother will
be there in that beautiful world on high."

These represent a third step in the development of the slave song, of
which "You may bury me in the East" is the first, and songs like "March
on" (chapter six) and "Steal away" are the second.  The first is
African music, the second Afro-American, while the third is a blending
of Negro music with the music heard in the foster land.  The result is
still distinctively Negro and the method of blending original, but the
elements are both Negro and Caucasian.  One might go further and find a
fourth step in this development, where the songs of white America have
been distinctively influenced by the slave songs or have incorporated
whole phrases of Negro melody, as "Swanee River" and "Old Black Joe."
Side by side, too, with the growth has gone the debasements and
imitations--the Negro "minstrel" songs, many of the "gospel" hymns, and
some of the contemporary "coon" songs,--a mass of music in which the
novice may easily lose himself and never find the real Negro melodies.

In these songs, I have said, the slave spoke to the world.  Such a
message is naturally veiled and half articulate.  Words and music have
lost each other and new and cant phrases of a dimly understood theology
have displaced the older sentiment.  Once in a while we catch a strange
word of an unknown tongue, as the "Mighty Myo," which figures as a
river of death; more often slight words or mere doggerel are joined to
music of singular sweetness.  Purely secular songs are few in number,
partly because many of them were turned into hymns by a change of
words, partly because the frolics were seldom heard by the stranger,
and the music less often caught.  Of nearly all the songs, however, the
music is distinctly sorrowful.  The ten master songs I have mentioned
tell in word and music of trouble and exile, of strife and hiding; they
grope toward some unseen power and sigh for rest in the End.

The words that are left to us are not without interest, and, cleared of
evident dross, they conceal much of real poetry and meaning beneath
conventional theology and unmeaning rhapsody.  Like all primitive folk,
the slave stood near to Nature's heart.  Life was a "rough and rolling
sea" like the brown Atlantic of the Sea Islands; the "Wilderness" was
the home of God, and the "lonesome valley" led to the way of life.
"Winter'll soon be over," was the picture of life and death to a
tropical imagination.  The sudden wild thunderstorms of the South awed
and impressed the Negroes,--at times the rumbling seemed to them
"mournful," at times imperious:

  "My Lord calls me,
  He calls me by the thunder,
  The trumpet sounds it in my soul."


The monotonous toil and exposure is painted in many words.  One sees
the ploughmen in the hot, moist furrow, singing:

  "Dere's no rain to wet you,
   Dere's no sun to burn you,
   Oh, push along, believer,
   I want to go home."


The bowed and bent old man cries, with thrice-repeated wail:

  "O Lord, keep me from sinking down,"

and he rebukes the devil of doubt who can whisper:

  "Jesus is dead and God's gone away."


Yet the soul-hunger is there, the restlessness of the savage, the wail
of the wanderer, and the plaint is put in one little phrase:

  My soul wants something that's new, that's new


Over the inner thoughts of the slaves and their relations one with
another the shadow of fear ever hung, so that we get but glimpses here
and there, and also with them, eloquent omissions and silences.  Mother
and child are sung, but seldom father; fugitive and weary wanderer call
for pity and affection, but there is little of wooing and wedding; the
rocks and the mountains are well known, but home is unknown.  Strange
blending of love and helplessness sings through the refrain:

  "Yonder's my ole mudder,
   Been waggin' at de hill so long;
  'Bout time she cross over,
   Git home bime-by."

Elsewhere comes the cry of the "motherless" and the "Farewell,
farewell, my only child."

Love-songs are scarce and fall into two categories--the frivolous and
light, and the sad.  Of deep successful love there is ominous silence,
and in one of the oldest of these songs there is a depth of history and
meaning:

  Poor Ro-sy, poor gal; Poor Ro-sy,
  poor gal; Ro-sy break my poor heart,
  Heav'n shall-a-be my home.


A black woman said of the song, "It can't be sung without a full heart
and a troubled sperrit."  The same voice sings here that sings in the
German folk-song:

    "Jetz Geh i' an's brunele, trink' aber net."


Of death the Negro showed little fear, but talked of it familiarly and
even fondly as simply a crossing of the waters, perhaps--who
knows?--back to his ancient forests again.  Later days transfigured his
fatalism, and amid the dust and dirt the toiler sang:

  "Dust, dust and ashes, fly over my grave,
   But the Lord shall bear my spirit home."


The things evidently borrowed from the surrounding world undergo
characteristic change when they enter the mouth of the slave.
Especially is this true of Bible phrases.  "Weep, O captive daughter of
Zion," is quaintly turned into "Zion, weep-a-low," and the wheels of
Ezekiel are turned every way in the mystic dreaming of the slave, till
he says:

 "There's a little wheel a-turnin' in-a-my heart."


As in olden time, the words of these hymns were improvised by some
leading minstrel of the religious band.  The circumstances of the
gathering, however, the rhythm of the songs, and the limitations of
allowable thought, confined the poetry for the most part to single or
double lines, and they seldom were expanded to quatrains or longer
tales, although there are some few examples of sustained efforts,
chiefly paraphrases of the Bible.  Three short series of verses have
always attracted me,--the one that heads this chapter, of one line of
which Thomas Wentworth Higginson has fittingly said, "Never, it seems
to me, since man first lived and suffered was his infinite longing for
peace uttered more plaintively."  The second and third are descriptions
of the Last Judgment,--the one a late improvisation, with some traces
of outside influence:


  "Oh, the stars in the elements are falling,
   And the moon drips away into blood,
   And the ransomed of the Lord are returning unto God,
   Blessed be the name of the Lord."

And the other earlier and homelier picture from the low coast lands:

  "Michael, haul the boat ashore,
   Then you'll hear the horn they blow,
   Then you'll hear the trumpet sound,
   Trumpet sound the world around,
   Trumpet sound for rich and poor,
   Trumpet sound the Jubilee,
   Trumpet sound for you and me."


Through all the sorrow of the Sorrow Songs there breathes a hope--a
faith in the ultimate justice of things.  The minor cadences of despair
change often to triumph and calm confidence.  Sometimes it is faith in
life, sometimes a faith in death, sometimes assurance of boundless
justice in some fair world beyond.  But whichever it is, the meaning is
always clear: that sometime, somewhere, men will judge men by their
souls and not by their skins.  Is such a hope justified?  Do the Sorrow
Songs sing true?

The silently growing assumption of this age is that the probation of
races is past, and that the backward races of to-day are of proven
inefficiency and not worth the saving.  Such an assumption is the
arrogance of peoples irreverent toward Time and ignorant of the deeds
of men.  A thousand years ago such an assumption, easily possible,
would have made it difficult for the Teuton to prove his right to life.
Two thousand years ago such dogmatism, readily welcome, would have
scouted the idea of blond races ever leading civilization.  So wofully
unorganized is sociological knowledge that the meaning of progress, the
meaning of "swift" and "slow" in human doing, and the limits of human
perfectability, are veiled, unanswered sphinxes on the shores of
science.  Why should AEschylus have sung two thousand years before
Shakespeare was born?  Why has civilization flourished in Europe, and
flickered, flamed, and died in Africa?  So long as the world stands
meekly dumb before such questions, shall this nation proclaim its
ignorance and unhallowed prejudices by denying freedom of opportunity
to those who brought the Sorrow Songs to the Seats of the Mighty?

Your country?  How came it yours?  Before the Pilgrims landed we were
here.  Here we have brought our three gifts and mingled them with
yours: a gift of story and song--soft, stirring melody in an
ill-harmonized and unmelodious land; the gift of sweat and brawn to
beat back the wilderness, conquer the soil, and lay the foundations of
this vast economic empire two hundred years earlier than your weak
hands could have done it; the third, a gift of the Spirit.  Around us
the history of the land has centred for thrice a hundred years; out of
the nation's heart we have called all that was best to throttle and
subdue all that was worst; fire and blood, prayer and sacrifice, have
billowed over this people, and they have found peace only in the altars
of the God of Right.  Nor has our gift of the Spirit been merely
passive.  Actively we have woven ourselves with the very warp and woof
of this nation,--we fought their battles, shared their sorrow, mingled
our blood with theirs, and generation after generation have pleaded
with a headstrong, careless people to despise not Justice, Mercy, and
Truth, lest the nation be smitten with a curse.  Our song, our toil,
our cheer, and warning have been given to this nation in
blood-brotherhood.  Are not these gifts worth the giving?  Is not this
work and striving?  Would America have been America without her Negro
people?

Even so is the hope that sang in the songs of my fathers well sung.  If
somewhere in this whirl and chaos of things there dwells Eternal Good,
pitiful yet masterful, then anon in His good time America shall rend
the Veil and the prisoned shall go free.  Free, free as the sunshine
trickling down the morning into these high windows of mine, free as
yonder fresh young voices welling up to me from the caverns of brick
and mortar below--swelling with song, instinct with life, tremulous
treble and darkening bass.  My children, my little children, are
singing to the sunshine, and thus they sing:

  Let us cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler,
  Cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler, Let us
  cheer the wea-ry trav-el-ler
  A-long the heav-en-ly way.

And the traveller girds himself, and sets his face toward the Morning,
and goes his way.




The Afterthought

Hear my cry, O God the Reader; vouchsafe that this my book fall not
still-born into the world wilderness.  Let there spring, Gentle One,
from out its leaves vigor of thought and thoughtful deed to reap the
harvest wonderful.  Let the ears of a guilty people tingle with truth,
and seventy millions sigh for the righteousness which exalteth nations,
in this drear day when human brotherhood is mockery and a snare.  Thus
in Thy good time may infinite reason turn the tangle straight, and
these crooked marks on a fragile leaf be not indeed


